1. Cell. 2022 Nov 23;185(24):4634-4653.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.017. Epub 
2022 Nov 7.

The phenotypic landscape of essential human genes.

Funk L(1), Su KC(2), Ly J(2), Feldman D(3), Singh A(3), Moodie B(2), Blainey 
PC(4), Cheeseman IM(5).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 415 Main St., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: pblainey@broadinstitute.org.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2023 Jan;24(1):2. doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00558-6.

Understanding the basis for cellular growth, proliferation, and function 
requires determining the roles of essential genes in diverse cellular processes, 
including visualizing their contributions to cellular organization and 
morphology. Here, we combined pooled CRISPR-Cas9-based functional screening of 
5,072 fitness-conferring genes in human HeLa cells with microscopy-based imaging 
of DNA, the DNA damage response, actin, and microtubules. Analysis of >31 
million individual cells identified measurable phenotypes for >90% of gene 
knockouts, implicating gene targets in specific cellular processes. Clustering 
of phenotypic similarities based on hundreds of quantitative parameters further 
revealed co-functional genes across diverse cellular activities, providing 
predictions for gene functions and associations. By conducting pooled live-cell 
screening of ∼450,000 cell division events for 239 genes, we additionally 
identified diverse genes with functional contributions to chromosome 
segregation. Our work establishes a resource detailing the consequences of 
disrupting core cellular processes that represents the functional landscape of 
essential human genes.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.017
PMCID: PMC10482496
PMID: 36347254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests P.C.B. is a consultant 
to and/or equity holder in companies in the life sciences industries including 
10X Genomics, GALT, Celsius Therapeutics, Next Generation Diagnostics, Cache 
DNA, Concerto Biosciences, and Stately. P.C.B.’s laboratory receives research 
funding from Calico Life Sciences and Merck for work related to genetic 
screening. The Broad Institute and MIT have filed U.S. patent applications on 
work described here and may seek to license the technology.


2. Chromosome Res. 2013 Apr;21(2):101-6. doi: 10.1007/s10577-013-9347-y. Epub 2013 
Apr 12.

Esperanto for histones: CENP-A, not CenH3, is the centromeric histone H3 
variant.

Earnshaw WC(1), Allshire RC, Black BE, Bloom K, Brinkley BR, Brown W, Cheeseman 
IM, Choo KH, Copenhaver GP, Deluca JG, Desai A, Diekmann S, Erhardt S, 
Fitzgerald-Hayes M, Foltz D, Fukagawa T, Gassmann R, Gerlich DW, Glover DM, 
Gorbsky GJ, Harrison SC, Heun P, Hirota T, Jansen LE, Karpen G, Kops GJ, Lampson 
MA, Lens SM, Losada A, Luger K, Maiato H, Maddox PS, Margolis RL, Masumoto H, 
McAinsh AD, Mellone BG, Meraldi P, Musacchio A, Oegema K, O'Neill RJ, Salmon ED, 
Scott KC, Straight AF, Stukenberg PT, Sullivan BA, Sullivan KF, Sunkel CE, 
Swedlow JR, Walczak CE, Warburton PE, Westermann S, Willard HF, Wordeman L, 
Yanagida M, Yen TJ, Yoda K, Cleveland DW.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield 
Road, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. bill.earnshaw@ed.ac.uk

Comment in
    Trends Genet. 2013 Sep;29(9):499-500. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.06.009.
    Trends Genet. 2013 Sep;29(9):500-2. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.06.008.

The first centromeric protein identified in any species was CENP-A, a divergent 
member of the histone H3 family that was recognised by autoantibodies from 
patients with scleroderma-spectrum disease. It has recently been suggested to 
rename this protein CenH3. Here, we argue that the original name should be 
maintained both because it is the basis of a long established nomenclature for 
centromere proteins and because it avoids confusion due to the presence of 
canonical histone H3 at centromeres.

DOI: 10.1007/s10577-013-9347-y
PMCID: PMC3627038
PMID: 23580138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Chromosome Res. 2004;12(6):641-53. doi: 10.1023/B:CHRO.0000036588.42225.2f.

"Holo"er than thou: chromosome segregation and kinetochore function in C. 
elegans.

Maddox PS(1), Oegema K, Desai A, Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)CMM-East, Rm 3071G, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 9500 Gilman Dr., La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. pmaddox@ucsd.edu

Kinetochores are proteinaceous organelles that assemble on centromeric DNA to 
direct chromosome segregation in all eukaryotes. While many aspects of 
kinetochore function are conserved, the nature of the chromosomal domain upon 
which kinetochores assemble varies dramatically between different species. In 
monocentric eukaryotes, kinetochores assemble on a localized region of each 
chromosome. In contrast, holocentric species such as the nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans have diffuse kinetochores that form along the entire length of their 
chromosomes. Here, we discuss the nature of chromosome segregation in C. 
elegans. In addition to reviewing what is known about kinetochore function, 
chromosome structure, and chromosome movement, we consider the consequences of 
the specialized holocentric architecture on chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1023/B:CHRO.0000036588.42225.2f
PMID: 15289669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Biol. 2004 Jan 20;14(2):R70-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2003.12.048.

Cell division: AAAtacking the mitotic spindle.

Cheeseman IM(1), Desai A.

Author information:
(1)CMM-East, Rm 3071G, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, 
California 92093, USA. icheeseman@ucsd.edu

Cell division requires the assembly of a microtubule-based spindle which 
captures and segregates sister chromatids. But how is this spindle broken down 
once chromosome segregation is complete? New evidence implicates a highly 
conserved AAA-ATPase in spindle disassembly at the end of mitosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2003.12.048
PMID: 14738753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Cell Biol. 2013 Dec 23;203(6):883-93. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201309076.

Spindle assembly checkpoint robustness requires Tpr-mediated regulation of 
Mad1/Mad2 proteostasis.

Schweizer N, Ferrás C, Kern DM, Logarinho E, Cheeseman IM, Maiato H.

Tpr is a conserved nuclear pore complex (NPC) protein implicated in the spindle 
assembly checkpoint (SAC) by an unknown mechanism. Here, we show that Tpr is 
required for normal SAC response by stabilizing Mad1 and Mad2 before mitosis. 
Tpr coimmunoprecipitated with Mad1 and Mad2 (hereafter designated as 
Tpr/Mad1/Mad2 or TM2 complex) during interphase and mitosis, and is required for 
Mad1–c-Mad2 recruitment to NPCs. Interestingly, Tpr was normally undetectable at 
kinetochores and dispensable for Mad1, but not for Mad2, kinetochore 
localization, which suggests that SAC robustness depends on Mad2 levels at 
kinetochores. Protein half-life measurements demonstrate that Tpr stabilizes 
Mad1 and Mad2, ensuring normal Mad1–c-Mad2 production in an mRNA- and 
kinetochore-independent manner. Overexpression of GFP-Mad2 restored normal SAC 
response and Mad2 kinetochore levels in Tpr-depleted cells. Mechanistically, we 
provide evidence that Tpr might spatially regulate SAC proteostasis through the 
SUMO-isopeptidases SENP1 and SENP2 at NPCs. Thus, Tpr is a 
kinetochore-independent, rate-limiting factor required to mount and sustain a 
robust SAC response.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201309076
PMCID: PMC3871433
PMID: 24344181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cell Biol. 2002 Apr 15;157(2):199-203. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200201052. Epub 2002 
Apr 15.

Simple centromere, complex kinetochore: linking spindle microtubules and 
centromeric DNA in budding yeast.

Cheeseman IM(1), Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3202, USA.

Although the budding yeast centromere is extremely short (125 bp) compared to 
those of other eukaryotes, the kinetochore that assembles on this DNA displays a 
rich molecular complexity. Here, we describe recent advances in our 
understanding of kinetochore function in budding yeast and present a model 
describing the attachment that is formed between spindle microtubules and 
centromeric DNA. This analysis may provide general principles for kinetochore 
function and regulation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200201052
PMCID: PMC2199245
PMID: 11956223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cell Biol. 2001 Dec 24;155(7):1137-45. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200109063. Epub 2001 
Dec 24.

Implication of a novel multiprotein Dam1p complex in outer kinetochore function.

Cheeseman IM(1), Brew C, Wolyniak M, Desai A, Anderson S, Muster N, Yates JR, 
Huffaker TC, Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720, USA.

Dam1p, Duo1p, and Dad1p can associate with each other physically and are 
required for both spindle integrity and kinetochore function in budding yeast. 
Here, we present our purification from yeast extracts of an approximately 245 kD 
complex containing Dam1p, Duo1p, and Dad1p and Spc19p, Spc34p, and the 
previously uncharacterized proteins Dad2p and Ask1p. This Dam1p complex appears 
to be regulated through the phosphorylation of multiple subunits with at least 
one phosphorylation event changing during the cell cycle. We also find that 
purified Dam1p complex binds directly to microtubules in vitro with an affinity 
of approximately 0.5 microM. To demonstrate that subunits of the Dam1p complex 
are functionally important for mitosis in vivo, we localized Spc19-green 
fluorescent protein (GFP), Spc34-GFP, Dad2-GFP, and Ask1-GFP to the mitotic 
spindle and to kinetochores and generated temperature-sensitive mutants of DAD2 
and ASK1. These and other analyses implicate the four newly identified subunits 
and the Dam1p complex as a whole in outer kinetochore function where they are 
well positioned to facilitate the association of chromosomes with spindle 
microtubules.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200109063
PMCID: PMC2199314
PMID: 11756468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Biol. 2005 Apr 26;15(8):771-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.03.018.

The CENP-F-like proteins HCP-1 and HCP-2 target CLASP to kinetochores to mediate 
chromosome segregation.

Cheeseman IM(1), MacLeod I, Yates JR 3rd, Oegema K, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Ludwig Institute for Cancer 
Research, University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, 
92093, USA. icheeseman@ucsd.edu

During chromosome segregation, kinetochores form dynamic connections with 
spindle microtubules. In vertebrates, these attachments require the activities 
of a number of outer kinetochore proteins, including CENP-F [1, 2] and the 
widely conserved microtubule-associated protein CLASP [3]. Here, we investigate 
the functional relationship between HCP-1/2, two redundant CENP-F-like proteins, 
and CLASP(CLS-2) in Caenorhabditis elegans. HCP-1/2 and CLASP(CLS-2) localize 
transiently to mitotic C. elegans kinetochores with nearly identical kinetic 
profiles, and biochemical purifications demonstrate that they also associate 
physically. In embryos depleted of HCP-1/2, CLASP(CLS-2) no longer localizes to 
chromosomes, whereas CLASP(CLS-2) depletion does not prevent HCP-1/2 targeting. 
Consistent with the localization dependency and biochemical association, 
depletion of HCP-1/2 or CLASP(CLS-2) resulted in virtually identical defects in 
mitotic chromosome segregation characterized by a failure of sister-chromatid 
biorientation. This phenotype could be partially suppressed by disrupting the 
astral forces that pull spindle poles apart in the 1 cell embryo, indicating 
that CLASP(CLS-2) is required for biorientation when chromosome-spindle 
attachments are subjected to poleward force. Our results establish that the key 
role of HCP-1/2 is to target CLASP(CLS-2) to kinetochores, and they support the 
recently proposed model that CLASP functions to promote the polymerization of 
kinetochore bound microtubules [4].

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2005.03.018
PMID: 15854912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1133-42. doi: 10.1101/gr.106773.110. Epub 2010 May 
27.

Functional genomics, proteomics, and regulatory DNA analysis in isogenic 
settings using zinc finger nuclease-driven transgenesis into a safe harbor locus 
in the human genome.

DeKelver RC(1), Choi VM, Moehle EA, Paschon DE, Hockemeyer D, Meijsing SH, 
Sancak Y, Cui X, Steine EJ, Miller JC, Tam P, Bartsevich VV, Meng X, Rupniewski 
I, Gopalan SM, Sun HC, Pitz KJ, Rock JM, Zhang L, Davis GD, Rebar EJ, Cheeseman 
IM, Yamamoto KR, Sabatini DM, Jaenisch R, Gregory PD, Urnov FD.

Author information:
(1)Sangamo BioSciences, Inc., Point Richmond Tech Center, Richmond, California 
94804, USA.

Isogenic settings are routine in model organisms, yet remain elusive for genetic 
experiments on human cells. We describe the use of designed zinc finger 
nucleases (ZFNs) for efficient transgenesis without drug selection into the 
PPP1R12C gene, a "safe harbor" locus known as AAVS1. ZFNs enable targeted 
transgenesis at a frequency of up to 15% following transient transfection of 
both transformed and primary human cells, including fibroblasts and hES cells. 
When added to this locus, transgenes such as expression cassettes for shRNAs, 
small-molecule-responsive cDNA expression cassettes, and reporter constructs, 
exhibit consistent expression and sustained function over 50 cell generations. 
By avoiding random integration and drug selection, this method allows bona fide 
isogenic settings for high-throughput functional genomics, proteomics, and 
regulatory DNA analysis in essentially any transformed human cell type and in 
primary cells.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.106773.110
PMCID: PMC2909576
PMID: 20508142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Methods Cell Biol. 2011;106:289-322. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-544172-8.00011-6.

Affinity purification of protein complexes in C. elegans.

Zanin E(1), Dumont J, Gassmann R, Cheeseman I, Maddox P, Bahmanyar S, Carvalho 
A, Niessen S, Yates JR 3rd, Oegema K, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Cellular & Molecular 
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

C. elegans is a powerful metazoan model system to address fundamental questions 
in cell and developmental biology. Research in C. elegans has traditionally 
focused on genetic, physiological, and cell biological approaches. However, C. 
elegans is also a facile system for biochemistry: worms are easy to grow in 
large quantities, the functionality of tagged fusion proteins can be assessed 
using mutants or RNAi, and the relevance of putative interaction partners can be 
rapidly tested in vivo. Combining biochemistry with function-based genetic and 
RNA interference screens can rapidly accelerate the delineation of protein 
networks and pathways in diverse contexts. In this chapter, we focus on two 
strategies to identify protein-protein interactions: single-step 
immunoprecipitation and tandem affinity purification. We describe methods for 
growth of worms in large-scale liquid culture, preparation of worm and embryo 
extracts, immunoprecipitation, and tandem affinity purification. In addition, we 
describe methods to test specificity of antibodies, strategies for optimizing 
starting material, and approaches to distinguish specific from non-specific 
interactions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-544172-8.00011-6
PMCID: PMC3319706
PMID: 22118282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Cell Biol. 2009 Sep 21;186(6):770-1. doi: 10.1083/jcb.1866pi. Epub 2009 Sep 
14.

Iain Cheeseman: a strong attachment to kinetochores. [An interview by Ben 
Short].

Cheeseman I.

Cheeseman is looking forward to a new era of research on chromosome segregation.

Cheeseman is looking forward to a new era of research on chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.1866pi
PMCID: PMC2753165
PMID: 19752023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 May 30;14(6):559-61. doi: 10.1038/ncb2509.

T time for point centromeres.

Gascoigne KE, Cheeseman IM.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2012 May 06;14(6):614-24. doi: 10.1038/ncb2495.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2012 May 06;14(6):604-13. doi: 10.1038/ncb2493.

The diverse nature of eukaryotic centromere structure has led to a prevailing 
view that the kinetochore-chromatin interface is fundamentally different in 
distinct species. Two studies now challenge this dogma with the identification 
of budding yeast homologues of the vertebrate centromere DNA-binding proteins 
CENP-T and CENP-W.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2509
PMID: 22561349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. EMBO J. 2013 Feb 6;32(3):424-36. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.348. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

CENP-T provides a structural platform for outer kinetochore assembly.

Nishino T(1), Rago F, Hori T, Tomii K, Cheeseman IM, Fukagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics and The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies SOKENDAI, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

The kinetochore forms a dynamic interface with microtubules from the mitotic 
spindle during mitosis. The Ndc80 complex acts as the key microtubule-binding 
complex at kinetochores. However, it is unclear how the Ndc80 complex associates 
with the inner kinetochore proteins that assemble upon centromeric chromatin. 
Here, based on a high-resolution structural analysis, we demonstrate that the 
N-terminal region of vertebrate CENP-T interacts with the 'RWD' domain in the 
Spc24/25 portion of the Ndc80 complex. Phosphorylation of CENP-T strengthens a 
cryptic hydrophobic interaction between CENP-T and Spc25 resulting in a 
phospho-regulated interaction that occurs without direct recognition of the 
phosphorylated residue. The Ndc80 complex interacts with both CENP-T and the 
Mis12 complex, but we find that these interactions are mutually exclusive, 
supporting a model in which two distinct pathways target the Ndc80 complex to 
kinetochores. Our results provide a model for how the multiple protein complexes 
at kinetochores associate in a phospho-regulated manner.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.348
PMCID: PMC3567495
PMID: 23334297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


14. Plant Mol Biol. 1999 Apr;39(6):1189-96. doi: 10.1023/a:1006197318246.

A cluster of five cell wall-associated receptor kinase genes, Wak1-5, are 
expressed in specific organs of Arabidopsis.

He ZH(1), Cheeseman I, He D, Kohorn BD.

Author information:
(1)Botany Department, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

WAK1 (wall-associated kinase 1) is a cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase that 
spans the plasma membrane and extends into the extracellular region to bind 
tightly to the cell wall. The Wak1 gene was mapped and found to lie in a tight 
cluster of five highly similar genes (Wak1-5) within a 30 kb region. All of the 
Wak genes encode a cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase, a transmembrane 
domain, and an extracytoplasmic region with several epidermal growth factor 
(EGF) repeats. The extracellular regions also contain limited amino acid 
identities to the tenascin superfamily, collagen, or the neurexins. RNA blot 
analysis with gene-specific probes revealed that Wak1, Wak3 and Wak5 are 
expressed primarily in leaves and stems of Arabidopsis. Wak4 mRNA is only 
detected in siliques, while Wak2 mRNA is found in high levels in leaves and 
stems, and in lower levels in flowers and siliques. A trace amount of Wak2 can 
also be detected in roots. Wak1 is induced by pathogen infection and salicylic 
acid or its analogue INA and is involved in the plant's response, and Wak2, Wak3 
and Wak5 also can be greatly induced by salicylic acid or INA. The WAK proteins 
have the potential to serve as both linkers of the cell wall to the plasma 
membrane and as signaling molecules, and since Wak expression is organ-specific 
and the isoforms vary significantly in the cell wall associated domain this 
family of proteins may be involved in cell wall-plasma membrane interactions 
that direct fundamental processes in angiosperms.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006197318246
PMID: 10380805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nature. 2004 Mar 4;428(6978):32-3. doi: 10.1038/428032b.

Cell division: feeling tense enough?

Cheeseman IM, Desai A.

Comment on
    Nature. 2004 Mar 4;428(6978):93-7. doi: 10.1038/nature02328.

DOI: 10.1038/428032b
PMID: 14999271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 May;8(5):446-57. doi: 10.1038/ncb1396. Epub 2006 Apr 16.

The CENP-H-I complex is required for the efficient incorporation of newly 
synthesized CENP-A into centromeres.

Okada M(1), Cheeseman IM, Hori T, Okawa K, McLeod IX, Yates JR 3rd, Desai A, 
Fukagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics and The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2006 May;8(5):427-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb0506-427.

In vertebrates, centromeres lack defined sequences and are thought to be 
propagated by epigenetic mechanisms involving the incorporation of specialized 
nucleosomes containing the histone H3 variant centromere protein (CENP)-A. 
However, the precise mechanisms that target CENP-A to centromeres remain poorly 
understood. Here, we isolated a multi-subunit complex, which includes the 
established inner kinetochore components CENP-H and CENP-I, and nine other 
proteins, from both human and chicken cells. Our analysis of these proteins 
demonstrates that the CENP-H-I complex can be divided into three functional 
sub-complexes, each of which is required for faithful chromosome segregation. 
Interestingly, newly expressed CENP-A is not efficiently incorporated into 
centromeres in knockout mutants of a subclass of CENP-H-I complex proteins, 
indicating that the CENP-H-I complex may function, in part, as a marker 
directing CENP-A deposition to centromeres.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1396
PMID: 16622420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genes Dev. 2008 Sep 1;22(17):2385-99. doi: 10.1101/gad.1687508.

A new mechanism controlling kinetochore-microtubule interactions revealed by 
comparison of two dynein-targeting components: SPDL-1 and the Rod/Zwilch/Zw10 
complex.

Gassmann R(1), Essex A, Hu JS, Maddox PS, Motegi F, Sugimoto A, O'Rourke SM, 
Bowerman B, McLeod I, Yates JR 3rd, Oegema K, Cheeseman IM, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research/Dept of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2008 Sep 1;22(17):2302-7. doi: 10.1101/gad.1719208.

Chromosome segregation requires stable bipolar attachments of spindle 
microtubules to kinetochores. The dynein/dynactin motor complex localizes 
transiently to kinetochores and is implicated in chromosome segregation, but its 
role remains poorly understood. Here, we use the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo 
to investigate the function of kinetochore dynein by analyzing the 
Rod/Zwilch/Zw10 (RZZ) complex and the associated coiled-coil protein SPDL-1. 
Both components are essential for Mad2 targeting to kinetochores and spindle 
checkpoint activation. RZZ complex inhibition, which abolishes both SPDL-1 and 
dynein/dynactin targeting to kinetochores, slows but does not prevent the 
formation of load-bearing kinetochore-microtubule attachments and reduces the 
fidelity of chromosome segregation. Surprisingly, inhibition of SPDL-1, which 
abolishes dynein/dynactin targeting to kinetochores without perturbing RZZ 
complex localization, prevents the formation of load-bearing attachments during 
most of prometaphase and results in extensive chromosome missegregation. 
Coinhibition of SPDL-1 along with the RZZ complex reduces the phenotypic 
severity to that observed following RZZ complex inhibition alone. We propose 
that the RZZ complex can inhibit the formation of load-bearing attachments and 
that this activity of the RZZ complex is normally controlled by dynein/dynactin 
localized via SPDL-1. This mechanism could coordinate the hand-off from initial 
weak dynein-mediated lateral attachments, which help orient kinetochores and 
enhance their ability to capture microtubules, to strong end-coupled attachments 
that drive chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1687508
PMCID: PMC2532926
PMID: 18765790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Sci STKE. 2005 Jan 11;2005(266):pl1. doi: 10.1126/stke.2662005pl1.

A combined approach for the localization and tandem affinity purification of 
protein complexes from metazoans.

Cheeseman IM(1), Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 
icheeseman@ucsd.edu <icheeseman@ucsd.edu>

An understanding of a protein's function is greatly aided by the knowledge of 
its localization in vivo and identification of any interacting partners. Here, 
we describe a method, based on expression of a genetically encoded fusion 
protein, that allows for protein localization and affinity purification (LAP) in 
metazoans. This method makes it possible to rapidly identify transformants and 
to conduct live imaging of protein localization and dynamics. In addition, the 
same tag can be used in a modified tandem affinity purification (TAP) procedure 
to isolate native protein complexes of high purity. The efficacy of this 
purification procedure allows for the characterization of rare protein complexes 
that are largely inaccessible to classical biochemical purifications. The LAP 
strategy should be widely applicable to the characterization of protein function 
in cellular and developmental contexts in various metazoans.

DOI: 10.1126/stke.2662005pl1
PMID: 15644491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Aug;14(8):3342-55. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e02-11-0765. Epub 2003 
May 3.

Kinetochore protein interactions and their regulation by the Aurora kinase 
Ipl1p.

Shang C(1), Hazbun TR, Cheeseman IM, Aranda J, Fields S, Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3202, USA.

Although there has been a recent explosion in the identification of budding 
yeast kinetochore components, the physical interactions that underlie 
kinetochore function remain obscure. To better understand how kinetochores 
attach to microtubules and how this attachment is regulated, we sought to 
characterize the interactions among kinetochore proteins, especially with 
respect to the microtubule-binding Dam1 complex. The Dam1 complex plays a 
crucial role in the chromosome-spindle attachment and is a key target for 
phospho-regulation of this attachment by the Aurora kinase Ipl1p. To identify 
protein-protein interactions involving the Dam1 complex, and the effects of 
Dam1p phosphorylation state on these physical interactions, we conducted both a 
genome-wide two-hybrid screen and a series of biochemical binding assays for 
Dam1p. A two-hybrid screen of a library of 6000 yeast open reading frames 
identified nine kinetochore proteins as Dam1p-interacting partners. From 113 in 
vitro binding reactions involving all nine subunits of the Dam1 complex and 32 
kinetochore proteins, we found at least nine interactions within the Dam1 
complex and 19 potential partners for the Dam1 complex. Strikingly, we found 
that the Dam1p-Ndc80p and Dam1p-Spc34p interactions were weakened by mutations 
mimicking phosphorylation at Ipl1p sites, allowing us to formulate a model for 
the effects of phosphoregulation on kinetochore function.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e02-11-0765
PMCID: PMC181571
PMID: 12925767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO Rep. 2010 Oct;11(10):727-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.146. Epub 2010 Sep 24.

Tension at EMBO's Aneuploidy Workshop.

De Wulf P(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, 
Italy. peter.dewulf@ifom-ieo-campus.it

The EMBO 2010 Workshop on Chromosome Segregation and Aneuploidy, held between 19 
and 23 June at Edinburgh University's Royal College of Surgeons, highlighted 
basic mitotic mechanisms, chromosome-based defects linked to human diseases and 
the processes that connect them.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2010.146
PMCID: PMC2948196
PMID: 20865017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Cell Biol. 2012 Oct 15;199(2):285-301. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201203091. Epub 2012 
Oct 8.

Cdk1 and Plk1 mediate a CLASP2 phospho-switch that stabilizes 
kinetochore-microtubule attachments.

Maia AR(1), Garcia Z, Kabeche L, Barisic M, Maffini S, Macedo-Ribeiro S, 
Cheeseman IM, Compton DA, Kaverina I, Maiato H.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.

Accurate chromosome segregation during mitosis relies on a dynamic kinetochore 
(KT)-microtubule (MT) interface that switches from a labile to a stable 
condition in response to correct MT attachments. This transition is essential to 
satisfy the spindle-assembly checkpoint (SAC) and couple MT-generated force with 
chromosome movements, but the underlying regulatory mechanism remains unclear. 
In this study, we show that during mitosis the MT- and KT-associated protein 
CLASP2 is progressively and distinctively phosphorylated by Cdk1 and Plk1 
kinases, concomitant with the establishment of KT-MT attachments. CLASP2 S1234 
was phosphorylated by Cdk1, which primed CLASP2 for association with Plk1. Plk1 
recruitment to KTs was enhanced by CLASP2 phosphorylation on S1234. This was 
specifically required to stabilize KT-MT attachments important for chromosome 
alignment and to coordinate KT and non-KT MT dynamics necessary to maintain 
spindle bipolarity. CLASP2 C-terminal phosphorylation by Plk1 was also required 
for chromosome alignment and timely satisfaction of the SAC. We propose that 
Cdk1 and Plk1 mediate a fine CLASP2 "phospho-switch" that temporally regulates 
KT-MT attachment stability.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201203091
PMCID: PMC3471233
PMID: 23045552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell. 2011 Apr 29;145(3):410-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.031.

Induced ectopic kinetochore assembly bypasses the requirement for CENP-A 
nucleosomes.

Gascoigne KE(1), Takeuchi K, Suzuki A, Hori T, Fukagawa T, Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Department of Biology, Nine 
Cambridge Center, MA 02142, USA.

Accurate chromosome segregation requires assembly of the multiprotein 
kinetochore complex at centromeres. Although prior work identified the 
centromeric histone H3-variant CENP-A as the important upstream factor necessary 
for centromere specification, in human cells CENP-A is not sufficient for 
kinetochore assembly. Here, we demonstrate that two constitutive DNA-binding 
kinetochore components, CENP-C and CENP-T, function to direct kinetochore 
formation. Replacing the DNA-binding regions of CENP-C and CENP-T with alternate 
chromosome-targeting domains recruits these proteins to ectopic loci, resulting 
in CENP-A-independent kinetochore assembly. These ectopic kinetochore-like foci 
are functional based on the stoichiometric assembly of multiple kinetochore 
components, including the microtubule-binding KMN network, the presence of 
microtubule attachments, the microtubule-sensitive recruitment of the spindle 
checkpoint protein Mad2, and the segregation behavior of foci-containing 
chromosomes. We additionally find that CENP-T phosphorylation regulates the 
mitotic assembly of both endogenous and ectopic kinetochores. Thus, CENP-C and 
CENP-T form a critical regulated platform for vertebrate kinetochore assembly.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.031
PMCID: PMC3085131
PMID: 21529714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Jul 1;25(13):1983-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-03-0837. Epub 
2014 May 14.

Kinetochore genes are coordinately up-regulated in human tumors as part of a 
FoxM1-related cell division program.

Thiru P(1), Kern DM(2), McKinley KL(2), Monda JK(2), Rago F(2), Su KC(1), 
Tsinman T(1), Yarar D(3), Bell GW(1), Cheeseman IM(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142Department of 
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(3)Merrimack Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142Department of 
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The key player in directing proper chromosome segregation is the macromolecular 
kinetochore complex, which mediates DNA-microtubule interactions. Previous 
studies testing individual kinetochore genes documented examples of their 
overexpression in tumors relative to normal tissue, leading to proposals that 
up-regulation of specific kinetochore genes may promote tumor progression. 
However, kinetochore components do not function in isolation, and previous 
studies did not comprehensively compare the expression behavior of kinetochore 
components. Here we analyze the expression behavior of the full range of human 
kinetochore components in diverse published expression compendia, including 
normal tissues and tumor samples. Our results demonstrate that kinetochore genes 
are rarely overexpressed individually. Instead, we find that core kinetochore 
genes are coordinately regulated with other cell division genes under virtually 
all conditions. This expression pattern is strongly correlated with the 
expression of the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1, which binds to the 
majority of cell division promoters. These observations suggest that kinetochore 
gene up-regulation in cancer reflects a general activation of the cell division 
program and that altered expression of individual kinetochore genes is unlikely 
to play a causal role in tumorigenesis.

© 2014 Thiru et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is 
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-03-0837
PMCID: PMC4072572
PMID: 24829384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Methods. 2015 Sep;12(9):838-40. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3483. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Inferring transient particle transport dynamics in live cells.

Monnier N(1), Barry Z(1), Park HY(2)(3)(4), Su KC(5)(6), Katz Z(2), English 
BP(4), Dey A(1), Pan K(1), Cheeseman IM(5)(6), Singer RH(2)(3)(4), Bathe M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(3)Gruss-Lipper Biophotonics Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, Virginia, 
USA.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Live-cell imaging and particle tracking provide rich information on mechanisms 
of intracellular transport. However, trajectory analysis procedures to infer 
complex transport dynamics involving stochastic switching between active 
transport and diffusive motion are lacking. We applied Bayesian model selection 
to hidden Markov modeling to infer transient transport states from trajectories 
of mRNA-protein complexes in live mouse hippocampal neurons and metaphase 
kinetochores in dividing human cells. The software is available at 
http://hmm-bayes.org/.

DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3483
PMCID: PMC4733533
PMID: 26192083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cell. 2015 Dec 17;60(6):886-98. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.10.027. Epub 2015 
Nov 19.

The CENP-L-N Complex Forms a Critical Node in an Integrated Meshwork of 
Interactions at the Centromere-Kinetochore Interface.

McKinley KL(1), Sekulic N(2), Guo LY(2), Tsinman T(3), Black BE(2), Cheeseman 
IM(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, 422 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

During mitosis, the macromolecular kinetochore complex assembles on the 
centromere to orchestrate chromosome segregation. The properties and 
architecture of the 16-subunit Constitutive Centromere-Associated Network (CCAN) 
that allow it to build a robust platform for kinetochore assembly are poorly 
understood. Here, we use inducible CRISPR knockouts and biochemical 
reconstitutions to define the interactions between the human CCAN proteins. We 
find that the CCAN does not assemble as a linear hierarchy, and instead, each 
sub-complex requires multiple non-redundant interactions for its localization to 
centromeres and the structural integrity of the overall assembly. We demonstrate 
that the CENP-L-N complex plays a crucial role at the core of this assembly 
through interactions with CENP-C and CENP-H-I-K-M. Finally, we show that the 
CCAN is remodeled over the cell cycle such that sub-complexes depend on their 
interactions differentially. Thus, an interdependent meshwork within the CCAN 
underlies the centromere specificity and stability of the kinetochore.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.10.027
PMCID: PMC4690846
PMID: 26698661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Rep. 2016 Nov 8;17(7):1728-1738. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.10.046.

A Regulatory Switch Alters Chromosome Motions at the Metaphase-to-Anaphase 
Transition.

Su KC(1), Barry Z(2), Schweizer N(3), Maiato H(4), Bathe M(2), Cheeseman IM(5).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(3)Chromosome Instability and Dynamics Laboratory, Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; i3S - 
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúdem, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 
Porto, Portugal.
(4)Chromosome Instability and Dynamics Laboratory, Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal; i3S - 
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúdem, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 
Porto, Portugal; Cell Division Unit, Department of Experimental Biology, 
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

To achieve chromosome segregation during mitosis, sister chromatids must undergo 
a dramatic change in their behavior to switch from balanced oscillations at the 
metaphase plate to directed poleward motion during anaphase. However, the 
factors that alter chromosome behavior at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition 
remain incompletely understood. Here, we perform time-lapse imaging to analyze 
anaphase chromosome dynamics in human cells. Using multiple directed 
biochemical, genetic, and physical perturbations, our results demonstrate that 
differences in the global phosphorylation states between metaphase and anaphase 
are the major determinant of chromosome motion dynamics. Indeed, causing a 
mitotic phosphorylation state to persist into anaphase produces dramatic 
metaphase-like oscillations. These induced oscillations depend on both 
kinetochore-derived and polar ejection forces that oppose poleward motion. Thus, 
our analysis of anaphase chromosome motion reveals that dephosphorylation of 
multiple mitotic substrates is required to suppress metaphase chromosome 
oscillatory motions and achieve directed poleward motion for successful 
chromosome segregation.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.10.046
PMCID: PMC5130098
PMID: 27829144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Cell. 2017 Feb 27;40(4):405-420.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.012. Epub 
2017 Feb 16.

Large-Scale Analysis of CRISPR/Cas9 Cell-Cycle Knockouts Reveals the Diversity 
of p53-Dependent Responses to Cell-Cycle Defects.

McKinley KL(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: 
kara.l.mckinley@gmail.com.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Defining the genes that are essential for cellular proliferation is critical for 
understanding organismal development and identifying high-value targets for 
disease therapies. However, the requirements for cell-cycle progression in human 
cells remain incompletely understood. To elucidate the consequences of acute and 
chronic elimination of cell-cycle proteins, we generated and characterized 
inducible CRISPR/Cas9 knockout human cell lines targeting 209 genes involved in 
diverse cell-cycle processes. We performed single-cell microscopic analyses to 
systematically establish the effects of the knockouts on subcellular 
architecture. To define variations in cell-cycle requirements between cultured 
cell lines, we generated knockouts across cell lines of diverse origins. We 
demonstrate that p53 modulates the phenotype of specific cell-cycle defects 
through distinct mechanisms, depending on the defect. This work provides a 
resource to broadly facilitate robust and long-term depletion of cell-cycle 
proteins and reveals insights into the requirements for cell-cycle progression.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.012
PMCID: PMC5345124
PMID: 28216383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Elife. 2017 Aug 25;6:e26866. doi: 10.7554/eLife.26866.

Astrin-SKAP complex reconstitution reveals its kinetochore interaction with 
microtubule-bound Ndc80.

Kern DM(1)(2), Monda JK(#)(1)(2), Su KC(#)(1), Wilson-Kubalek EM(3), Cheeseman 
IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
United States.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, United 
States.
(#)Contributed equally

Chromosome segregation requires robust interactions between the macromolecular 
kinetochore structure and dynamic microtubule polymers. A key outstanding 
question is how kinetochore-microtubule attachments are modulated to ensure that 
bi-oriented attachments are selectively stabilized and maintained. The 
Astrin-SKAP complex localizes preferentially to properly bi-oriented sister 
kinetochores, representing the final outer kinetochore component recruited prior 
to anaphase onset. Here, we reconstitute the 4-subunit Astrin-SKAP complex, 
including a novel MYCBP subunit. Our work demonstrates that the Astrin-SKAP 
complex contains separable kinetochore localization and microtubule binding 
domains. In addition, through cross-linking analysis in human cells and 
biochemical reconstitution, we show that the Astrin-SKAP complex binds 
synergistically to microtubules with the Ndc80 complex to form an integrated 
interface. We propose a model in which the Astrin-SKAP complex acts together 
with the Ndc80 complex to stabilize correctly formed kinetochore-microtubule 
interactions.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.26866
PMCID: PMC5602300
PMID: 28841134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests declared.


29. Mol Biol Cell. 2018 Oct 1;29(20):2370-2377. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E18-04-0214. Epub 
2018 Aug 9.

CRISPR/Cas9-based gene targeting using synthetic guide RNAs enables robust cell 
biological analyses.

Su KC(1), Tsang MJ(1), Emans N(2), Cheeseman IM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Persomics USA, Weston, MA 02493.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.

A key goal for cell biological analyses is to assess the phenotypes that result 
from eliminating a target gene. Since the early 1990s, the predominant strategy 
utilized in human tissue culture cells has been RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated 
protein depletion. However, RNAi suffers well-documented off-target effects as 
well as incomplete and reversible protein depletion. The implementation of 
CRISPR/Cas9-based DNA cleavage has revolutionized the capacity to conduct 
functional studies in human cells. However, this approach is still underutilized 
for conducting visual phenotypic analyses, particularly for essential genes that 
require conditional strategies to eliminate their gene products. Optimizing this 
strategy requires effective and streamlined approaches to introduce the Cas9 
guide RNA into target cells. Here we assess the efficacy of synthetic guide RNA 
transfection to eliminate gene products for cell biological studies. On the 
basis of three representative gene targets (KIF11, CENPN, and RELA), we 
demonstrate that transfection of synthetic single guide RNA (sgRNA) and CRISPR 
RNA (crRNA) guides works comparably for protein depletion as cell lines stably 
expressing lentiviral-delivered RNA guides. We additionally demonstrate that 
synthetic sgRNAs can be introduced by reverse transfection on an array. 
Together, these strategies provide a robust, flexible, and scalable approach for 
conducting functional studies in human cells.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E18-04-0214
PMCID: PMC6233062
PMID: 30091644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Rep. 2018 Oct 9;25(2):368-382.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.09.032.

Microcephaly Modeling of Kinetochore Mutation Reveals a Brain-Specific 
Phenotype.

Omer Javed A(1), Li Y(2), Muffat J(3), Su KC(4), Cohen MA(4), Lungjangwa T(4), 
Aubourg P(5), Cheeseman IM(6), Jaenisch R(7).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, ED 569, 5 Rue Jean-Baptiste Clément, 92290 
Châtenay-Malabry, France; Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main 
Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON M4G 0A4, Canada; Department of 
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON 
M5S 1A8, Canada.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 1 King's 
College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada; Program in Neurosciences and Mental 
Health, The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, 
Canada.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(5)Université Paris-Saclay, ED 569, 5 Rue Jean-Baptiste Clément, 92290 
Châtenay-Malabry, France; INSERM U1169, CHU Bicêtre Paris Sud, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(6)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, MIT, 31 Ames Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA.
(7)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, MIT, 31 Ames Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA. Electronic address: jaenisch@wi.mit.edu.

Most genes mutated in microcephaly patients are expressed ubiquitously, and yet 
the brain is the only major organ compromised in most patients. Why the 
phenotype remains brain specific is poorly understood. In this study, we used 
in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to monitor the effect of 
a point mutation in kinetochore null protein 1 (KNL1; CASC5), identified in 
microcephaly patients, during in vitro brain development. We found that neural 
progenitors bearing a patient mutation showed reduced KNL1 levels, aneuploidy, 
and an abrogated spindle assembly checkpoint. By contrast, no reduction of KNL1 
levels or abnormalities was observed in fibroblasts and neural crest cells. We 
established that the KNL1 patient mutation generates an exonic splicing silencer 
site, which mainly affects neural progenitors because of their higher levels of 
splicing proteins. Our results provide insight into the brain-specific 
phenomenon, consistent with microcephaly being the only major phenotype of 
patients bearing KNL1 mutation.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.09.032
PMCID: PMC6392048
PMID: 30304678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Cell. 2019 Oct 7;51(1):35-48.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.07.016. Epub 
2019 Aug 15.

Quiescent Cells Actively Replenish CENP-A Nucleosomes to Maintain Centromere 
Identity and Proliferative Potential.

Swartz SZ(1), McKay LS(1), Su KC(1), Bury L(1), Padeganeh A(2), Maddox PS(2), 
Knouse KA(1), Cheeseman IM(3).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(2)Biology Department, UNC Chapel Hill, 120 South Road, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-3280, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Centromeres provide a robust model for epigenetic inheritance as they are 
specified by sequence-independent mechanisms involving the histone H3-variant 
centromere protein A (CENP-A). Prevailing models indicate that the high 
intrinsic stability of CENP-A nucleosomes maintains centromere identity 
indefinitely. Here, we demonstrate that CENP-A is not stable at centromeres but 
is instead gradually and continuously incorporated in quiescent cells including 
G0-arrested tissue culture cells and prophase I-arrested oocytes. Quiescent 
CENP-A incorporation involves the canonical CENP-A deposition machinery but 
displays distinct requirements from cell cycle-dependent deposition. We 
demonstrate that Plk1 is required specifically for G1 CENP-A deposition, whereas 
transcription promotes CENP-A incorporation in quiescent oocytes. Preventing 
CENP-A deposition during quiescence results in significantly reduced CENP-A 
levels and perturbs chromosome segregation following the resumption of cell 
division. In contrast to quiescent cells, terminally differentiated cells fail 
to maintain CENP-A levels. Our work reveals that quiescent cells actively 
maintain centromere identity providing an indicator of proliferative potential.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.07.016
PMCID: PMC6783363
PMID: 31422918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors have no 
conflicts to declare.


32. Elife. 2020 Nov 11;9:e59770. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59770.

Alpha-satellite RNA transcripts are repressed by centromere-nucleolus 
associations.

Bury L(#)(1), Moodie B(#)(1), Ly J(1)(2), McKay LS(1), Miga KH(3), Cheeseman 
IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
United States.
(3)UC Santa Cruz Genomics Institute, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Although originally thought to be silent chromosomal regions, centromeres are 
instead actively transcribed. However, the behavior and contributions of 
centromere-derived RNAs have remained unclear. Here, we used single-molecule 
fluorescence in-situ hybridization (smFISH) to detect alpha-satellite RNA 
transcripts in intact human cells. We find that alpha-satellite RNA-smFISH foci 
levels vary across cell lines and over the cell cycle, but do not remain 
associated with centromeres, displaying localization consistent with other long 
non-coding RNAs. Alpha-satellite expression occurs through RNA polymerase 
II-dependent transcription, but does not require established centromere or cell 
division components. Instead, our work implicates centromere-nucleolar 
interactions as repressing alpha-satellite expression. The fraction of 
nucleolar-localized centromeres inversely correlates with alpha-satellite 
transcripts levels across cell lines and transcript levels increase 
substantially when the nucleolus is disrupted. The control of alpha-satellite 
transcripts by centromere-nucleolar contacts provides a mechanism to modulate 
centromere transcription and chromatin dynamics across diverse cell states and 
conditions.

© 2020, Bury et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.59770
PMCID: PMC7679138
PMID: 33174837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LB, BM, JL, LM, KM, IC No competing interests 
declared


33. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 May 21:2024.04.06.588385. doi: 
10.1101/2024.04.06.588385.

Nuclear release of eIF1 globally increases stringency of start-codon selection 
to preserve mitotic arrest physiology.

Ly J, Xiang K, Su KC, Sissoko GB, Bartel DP, Cheeseman IM.

Regulated start-codon selection has the potential to reshape the proteome 
through the differential production of uORFs, canonical proteins, and 
alternative translational isoforms. However, conditions under which start-codon 
selection is altered remain poorly defined. Here, using transcriptome-wide 
translation initiation site profiling, we reveal a global increase in the 
stringency of start-codon selection during mammalian mitosis. Low-efficiency 
initiation sites are preferentially repressed in mitosis, resulting in pervasive 
changes in the translation of thousands of start sites and their corresponding 
protein products. This increased stringency of start-codon selection during 
mitosis results from increased interactions between the key regulator of 
start-codon selection, eIF1, and the 40S ribosome. We find that increased 
eIF1-40S ribosome interactions during mitosis are mediated by the release of a 
nuclear pool of eIF1 upon nuclear envelope breakdown. Selectively depleting the 
nuclear pool of eIF1 eliminates the changes to translational stringency during 
mitosis, resulting in altered mitotic proteome composition. In addition, 
preventing mitotic translational rewiring results in substantially increased 
cell death and decreased mitotic slippage following treatment with anti-mitotic 
chemotherapeutics. Thus, cells globally control translation initiation 
stringency with critical roles during the mammalian cell cycle to preserve 
mitotic cell physiology.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.04.06.588385
PMCID: PMC11014515
PMID: 38617206


34. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Apr 18:2024.04.17.589883. doi: 
10.1101/2024.04.17.589883.

A conserved germline-specific Dsn1 alternative splice isoform supports oocyte 
and embryo development.

Ly J(1)(2), Blengini CS(3), Cady SL(1)(2), Schindler K(3), Cheeseman IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
United States.
(3)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, United 
States.

Update in
    Curr Biol. 2024 Sep 23;34(18):4307-4317.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2024.07.089.

Alternative mRNA splicing can generate distinct protein isoforms to allow for 
the differential control of cell processes across cell types. However, 
alternative splice isoforms that differentially modulate distinct cell division 
programs have remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate that mammalian germ cells 
express an alternate mRNA splice isoform for the kinetochore component, DSN1, a 
subunit of the MIS12 complex that links the centromeres to spindle microtubules 
during chromosome segregation. This germline DSN1 isoform bypasses the 
requirement for Aurora kinase phosphorylation for its centromere localization 
due to the absence of a key regulatory region allowing DSN1 to display 
persistent centromere localization. Expression of the germline DSN1 isoform in 
somatic cells results in constitutive kinetochore localization, chromosome 
segregation errors, and growth defects, providing an explanation for its tight 
cell type-specific expression. Reciprocally, precisely eliminating expression of 
the germline DSN1 splice isoform in mouse models disrupts oocyte maturation and 
early embryonic divisions coupled with a reduction in fertility. Together, this 
work identifies a germline-specific splice isoform for a chromosome segregation 
component and implicates its role in mammalian fertility.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.04.17.589883
PMCID: PMC11042369
PMID: 38659852


35. Curr Biol. 2024 Sep 23;34(18):4307-4317.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2024.07.089. Epub 
2024 Aug 22.

A conserved germline-specific Dsn1 alternative splice isoform supports oocyte 
and embryo development.

Ly J(1), Blengini CS(2), Cady SL(1), Schindler K(2), Cheeseman IM(3).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Apr 18:2024.04.17.589883. doi: 10.1101/2024.04.17.589883.

The chromosome segregation and cell division programs associated with somatic 
mitosis and germline meiosis display dramatic differences such as kinetochore 
orientation, cohesin removal, or the presence of a gap phase.1,2,3,4,5,6 These 
changes in chromosome segregation require alterations to the established cell 
division machinery.5,6 It remains unclear what aspects of kinetochore function 
and its regulatory control differ between the mitotic and meiotic cell divisions 
to rewire these core processes. Alternative RNA splicing can generate distinct 
protein isoforms to allow for the differential control of cell processes across 
cell types. However, alternative splice isoforms that differentially modulate 
distinct cell division programs have remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate that 
mammalian germ cells express an alternative mRNA splice isoform for the 
kinetochore component, DSN1, a subunit of the MIS12 complex that links the 
centromeres to spindle microtubules during chromosome segregation. This germline 
DSN1 isoform bypasses the requirement for Aurora kinase phosphorylation for its 
centromere localization due to the absence of a key regulatory region allowing 
DSN1 to display persistent centromere localization. Expression of the germline 
DSN1 isoform in somatic cells results in constitutive kinetochore localization, 
chromosome segregation errors, and growth defects, providing an explanation for 
its tight cell-type-specific expression. Reciprocally, precisely eliminating 
expression of the germline-specific DSN1 splice isoform in mouse models disrupts 
oocyte maturation and early embryonic divisions coupled with a reduction in 
fertility. Together, this work identifies a germline-specific splice isoform for 
a chromosome segregation component and implicates its role in mammalian 
fertility.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2024.07.089
PMCID: PMC11421959
PMID: 39178843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests I.M.C. is a member of 
the Current Biology advisory board.


36. Nature. 2024 Nov;635(8038):490-498. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08088-3. Epub 2024 
Oct 23.

Nuclear release of eIF1 restricts start-codon selection during mitosis.

Ly J(1)(2), Xiang K(1)(2)(3), Su KC(1)(2), Sissoko GB(1)(2), Bartel DP(1)(2)(3), 
Cheeseman IM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.
(5)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Regulated start-codon selection has the potential to reshape the proteome 
through the differential production of upstream open reading frames, canonical 
proteins, and alternative translational isoforms1-3. However, conditions under 
which start codon selection is altered remain poorly defined. Here, using 
transcriptome-wide translation-initiation-site profiling4, we reveal a global 
increase in the stringency of start-codon selection during mammalian mitosis. 
Low-efficiency initiation sites are preferentially repressed in mitosis, 
resulting in pervasive changes in the translation of thousands of start sites 
and their corresponding protein products. This enhanced stringency of 
start-codon selection during mitosis results from increased association between 
the 40S ribosome and the key regulator of start-codon selection, eIF1. We find 
that increased eIF1-40S ribosome interaction during mitosis is mediated by the 
release of a nuclear pool of eIF1 upon nuclear envelope breakdown. Selectively 
depleting the nuclear pool of eIF1 eliminates the change to translational 
stringency during mitosis, resulting in altered synthesis of thousands of 
protein isoforms. In addition, preventing mitotic translational rewiring results 
in substantially increased cell death and decreased mitotic slippage in cells 
that experience a mitotic delay induced by anti-mitotic chemotherapies. Thus, 
cells globally control stringency of translation initiation, which has critical 
roles during the mammalian cell cycle in preserving mitotic cell physiology.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-08088-3
PMID: 39443796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests D.P.B. has equity in Alnylam 
Pharmaceuticals, where he is a co-founder and advisor. The other authors declare 
no competing interests.


37. Dev Cell. 2008 Nov;15(5):645-55. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.10.011.

Toward a molecular structure of the eukaryotic kinetochore.

Welburn JP(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA. welburn@wi.mit.edu

Chromosome segregation in eukaryotes requires a large molecular assembly termed 
the kinetochore to attach chromosomes to spindle microtubules. Recent work has 
made substantial progress in defining the composition and activities of the 
kinetochore, but much remains to be learned about its macromolecular structure. 
This commentary discusses recent insights into structural features of the 
kinetochore, how these inform our understanding of its biological function, and 
the key challenges for the future.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.10.011
PMID: 19000831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):374-85. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.01.011.

The human kinetochore Ska1 complex facilitates microtubule 
depolymerization-coupled motility.

Welburn JP(1), Grishchuk EL, Backer CB, Wilson-Kubalek EM, Yates JR 3rd, 
Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Suite 401, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Mitotic chromosome segregation requires that kinetochores attach to microtubule 
polymers and harness microtubule dynamics to drive chromosome movement. In 
budding yeast, the Dam1 complex couples kinetochores with microtubule 
depolymerization. However, a metazoan homolog of the Dam1 complex has not been 
identified. To identify proteins that play a corresponding role at the 
vertebrate kinetochore-microtubule interface, we isolated a three subunit human 
Ska1 complex, including the previously uncharacterized protein Rama1 that 
localizes to the outer kinetochore and spindle microtubules. Depletion of Ska1 
complex subunits severely compromises proper chromosome segregation. 
Reconstituted Ska1 complex possesses two separable biochemical activities: 
direct microtubule binding through the Ska1 subunit, and microtubule-stimulated 
oligomerization imparted by the Rama1 subunit. The full Ska1 complex forms 
assemblies on microtubules that can facilitate the processive movement of 
microspheres along depolymerizing microtubules. In total, these results 
demonstrate a critical role for the Ska1 complex in interacting with dynamic 
microtubules at the outer kinetochore.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.01.011
PMCID: PMC2746561
PMID: 19289083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell. 2010 May 14;38(3):383-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.02.034.

Aurora B phosphorylates spatially distinct targets to differentially regulate 
the kinetochore-microtubule interface.

Welburn JP(1), Vleugel M, Liu D, Yates JR 3rd, Lampson MA, Fukagawa T, Cheeseman 
IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Accurate chromosome segregation requires carefully regulated interactions 
between kinetochores and microtubules, but how plasticity is achieved to correct 
diverse attachment defects remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that Aurora B 
kinase phosphorylates three spatially distinct targets within the conserved 
outer kinetochore KNL1/Mis12 complex/Ndc80 complex (KMN) network, the key player 
in kinetochore-microtubule attachments. The combinatorial phosphorylation of the 
KMN network generates graded levels of microtubule-binding activity, with full 
phosphorylation severely compromising microtubule binding. Altering the 
phosphorylation state of each protein causes corresponding chromosome 
segregation defects. Importantly, the spatial distribution of these targets 
along the kinetochore axis leads to their differential phosphorylation in 
response to changes in tension and attachment state. In total, rather than 
generating exclusively binary changes in microtubule binding, our results 
suggest a mechanism for the tension-dependent fine-tuning of 
kinetochore-microtubule interactions.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.02.034
PMCID: PMC2873218
PMID: 20471944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Jun;23(11):2122-30. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-11-0931. Epub 2012 
Apr 4.

CSAP localizes to polyglutamylated microtubules and promotes proper cilia 
function and zebrafish development.

Backer CB(1), Gutzman JH, Pearson CG, Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

The diverse populations of microtubule polymers in cells are functionally 
distinguished by different posttranslational modifications, including 
polyglutamylation. Polyglutamylation is enriched on subsets of microtubules 
including those found in the centrioles, mitotic spindle, and cilia. However, 
whether this modification alters intrinsic microtubule dynamics or affects 
extrinsic associations with specific interacting partners remains to be 
determined. Here we identify the microtubule-binding protein centriole and 
spindle-associated protein (CSAP), which colocalizes with polyglutamylated 
tubulin to centrioles, spindle microtubules, and cilia in human tissue culture 
cells. Reducing tubulin polyglutamylation prevents CSAP localization to both 
spindle and cilia microtubules. In zebrafish, CSAP is required for normal brain 
development and proper left-right asymmetry, defects that are qualitatively 
similar to those reported previously for depletion of 
polyglutamylation-conjugating enzymes. We also find that CSAP is required for 
proper cilia beating. Our work supports a model in which polyglutamylation can 
target selected microtubule-associated proteins, such as CSAP, to microtubule 
subpopulations, providing specific functional capabilities to these populations.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E11-11-0931
PMCID: PMC3364176
PMID: 22493317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Cell. 2012 Nov 13;23(5):968-80. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.012. Epub 2012 
Oct 18.

The kinetochore-bound Ska1 complex tracks depolymerizing microtubules and binds 
to curved protofilaments.

Schmidt JC(1), Arthanari H, Boeszoermenyi A, Dashkevich NM, Wilson-Kubalek EM, 
Monnier N, Markus M, Oberer M, Milligan RA, Bathe M, Wagner G, Grishchuk EL, 
Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Nov 13;23(5):1081.

To ensure equal chromosome segregation during mitosis, the macromolecular 
kinetochore must remain attached to depolymerizing microtubules, which drive 
chromosome movements. How kinetochores associate with depolymerizing 
microtubules, which undergo dramatic structural changes forming curved 
protofilaments, has yet to be defined in vertebrates. Here, we demonstrate that 
the conserved kinetochore-localized Ska1 complex tracks with depolymerizing 
microtubule ends and associates with both the microtubule lattice and curved 
protofilaments. In contrast, the Ndc80 complex, a central player in the 
kinetochore-microtubule interface, binds only to the straight microtubule 
lattice and lacks tracking activity. We demonstrate that the Ska1 complex 
imparts its tracking capability to the Ndc80 complex. Finally, we present a 
structure of the Ska1 microtubule-binding domain that reveals its interaction 
with microtubules and its regulation by Aurora B. This work defines an 
integrated kinetochore-microtubule interface formed by the Ska1 and Ndc80 
complexes that associates with depolymerizing microtubules, potentially by 
interacting with curved microtubule protofilaments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.012
PMCID: PMC3500403
PMID: 23085020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Biol. 2013 Mar 4;200(5):557-65. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201211113.

Review series: The functions and consequences of force at kinetochores.

Rago F(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 0214, USA.

Chromosome segregation requires the generation of force at the kinetochore-the 
multiprotein structure that facilitates attachment of chromosomes to spindle 
microtubules. This force is required both to move chromosomes and to signal the 
formation of proper bioriented attachments. To understand the role of force in 
these processes, it is critical to define how force is generated at 
kinetochores, the contributions of this force to chromosome movement, and how 
the kinetochore is structured and organized to withstand and respond to force. 
Classical studies and recent work provide a framework to dissect the mechanisms, 
functions, and consequences of force at kinetochores.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201211113
PMCID: PMC3587826
PMID: 23460675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cell Biol. 2013 Apr 1;201(1):23-32. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201301006. Epub 2013 Mar 
25.

CDK-dependent phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion coordinately control 
kinetochore assembly state.

Gascoigne KE(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Accurate chromosome segregation requires assembly of the multiprotein 
kinetochore complex. Prior work has identified more than 100 different 
kinetochore components in human cells. However, little is known about the 
regulatory processes that specify their assembly upon mitotic entry and 
disassembly at mitotic exit. In this paper, we used a live-cell imaging-based 
assay to quantify kinetochore disassembly kinetics and systematically analyze 
the role of potential regulatory mechanisms in controlling kinetochore assembly 
state. We find that kinetochore assembly and disassembly was driven primarily by 
mitotic phosphorylation downstream of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK). In 
addition, we demonstrate that nuclear exclusion of the Ndc80 complex helped 
restrict kinetochore formation to mitosis. Combining constitutive CDK-dependent 
phosphorylation of CENP-T and forced nuclear localization of the Ndc80 complex 
partially prevented kinetochore disassembly at mitotic exit and led to 
chromosome segregation defects in subsequent divisions. In total, we find that 
the coordinated temporal regulation of outer kinetochore assembly is essential 
for accurate cell division.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201301006
PMCID: PMC3613690
PMID: 23530067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell. 2013 Jul 18;154(2):391-402. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.010.

Cortical dynein and asymmetric membrane elongation coordinately position the 
spindle in anaphase.

Kiyomitsu T(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. tomomi.kiyomitsu@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Cell. 2013 Sep 12;154(6):1401.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Jul 18;154(2):269-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.035.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;14(9):545. doi: 10.1038/nrm3648.

Mitotic spindle position defines the cell-cleavage site during cytokinesis. 
However, the mechanisms that control spindle positioning to generate equal-sized 
daughter cells remain poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that two 
mechanisms act coordinately to center the spindle during anaphase in 
symmetrically dividing human cells. First, the spindle is positioned directly by 
the microtubule-based motor dynein, which we demonstrate is targeted to the cell 
cortex by two distinct pathways: a Gαi/LGN/NuMA-dependent pathway and a 4.1G/R 
and NuMA-dependent, anaphase-specific pathway. Second, we find that asymmetric 
plasma membrane elongation occurs in response to spindle mispositioning to alter 
the cellular boundaries relative to the spindle. Asymmetric membrane elongation 
is promoted by chromosome-derived Ran-GTP signals that locally reduce Anillin at 
the growing cell cortex. In asymmetrically elongating cells, dynein-dependent 
spindle anchoring at the stationary cell cortex ensures proper spindle 
positioning. Our results reveal the anaphase-specific spindle centering systems 
that achieve equal-sized cell division.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.010
PMCID: PMC4177044
PMID: 23870127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cell. 2014 Jul 17;158(2):397-411. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.016.

Polo-like kinase 1 licenses CENP-A deposition at centromeres.

McKinley KL(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, MIT, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, MIT, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2014 Sep 8;24(17):R808-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.07.026.

To ensure the stable transmission of the genome during vertebrate cell division, 
the mitotic spindle must attach to a single locus on each chromosome, termed the 
centromere. The fundamental requirement for faithful centromere inheritance is 
the controlled deposition of the centromere-specifying histone, CENP-A. However, 
the regulatory mechanisms that ensure the precise control of CENP-A deposition 
have proven elusive. Here, we identify polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) as a 
centromere-localized regulator required to initiate CENP-A deposition in human 
cells. We demonstrate that faithful CENP-A deposition requires integrated 
signals from Plk1 and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), with Plk1 promoting the 
localization of the key CENP-A deposition factor, the Mis18 complex, and CDK 
inhibiting Mis18 complex assembly. By bypassing these regulated steps, we 
uncoupled CENP-A deposition from cell-cycle progression, resulting in mitotic 
defects. Thus, CENP-A deposition is controlled by a two-step regulatory paradigm 
comprised of Plk1 and CDK that is crucial for genomic integrity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.016
PMCID: PMC4192726
PMID: 25036634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Apr 15;27(8):1197-203. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0858. Epub 
2016 Mar 3.

Structural comparison of the Caenorhabditis elegans and human Ndc80 complexes 
bound to microtubules reveals distinct binding behavior.

Wilson-Kubalek EM(1), Cheeseman IM(2), Milligan RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structure Cell Biology, Department of Integrative Structure and 
Computational Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037 
kubalek@scripps.edu.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(3)Laboratory of Structure Cell Biology, Department of Integrative Structure and 
Computational Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

During cell division, kinetochores must remain tethered to the plus ends of 
dynamic microtubule polymers. However, the molecular basis for robust 
kinetochore-microtubule interactions remains poorly understood. The conserved 
four-subunit Ndc80 complex plays an essential and direct role in generating 
dynamic kinetochore-microtubule attachments. Here we compare the binding of 
theCaenorhabditis elegansand human Ndc80 complexes to microtubules at high 
resolution using cryo-electron microscopy reconstructions. Despite the conserved 
roles of the Ndc80 complex in diverse organisms, we find that the attachment 
mode of these complexes for microtubules is distinct. The human Ndc80 complex 
binds every tubulin monomer along the microtubule protofilament, whereas theC. 
elegansNdc80 complex binds more tightly to β-tubulin. In addition, theC. 
elegansNdc80 complex tilts more toward the adjacent protofilament. These 
structural differences in the Ndc80 complex between different species may play 
significant roles in the nature of kinetochore-microtubule interactions.

© 2016 Wilson-Kubalek et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication 
it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0858
PMCID: PMC4831874
PMID: 26941333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Biol. 2016 May 9;213(3):315-28. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201510117. Epub 2016 May 
2.

A mitotic SKAP isoform regulates spindle positioning at astral microtubule plus 
ends.

Kern DM(1), Nicholls PK(2), Page DC(3), Cheeseman IM(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2016 May 9;213(3):293-5. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201604075.

The Astrin/SKAP complex plays important roles in mitotic chromosome alignment 
and centrosome integrity, but previous work found conflicting results for SKAP 
function. Here, we demonstrate that SKAP is expressed as two distinct isoforms 
in mammals: a longer, testis-specific isoform that was used for the previous 
studies in mitotic cells and a novel, shorter mitotic isoform. Unlike the long 
isoform, short SKAP rescues SKAP depletion in mitosis and displays robust 
microtubule plus-end tracking, including localization to astral microtubules. 
Eliminating SKAP microtubule binding results in severe chromosome segregation 
defects. In contrast, SKAP mutants specifically defective for plus-end tracking 
facilitate proper chromosome segregation but display spindle positioning 
defects. Cells lacking SKAP plus-end tracking have reduced Clasp1 localization 
at microtubule plus ends and display increased lateral microtubule contacts with 
the cell cortex, which we propose results in unbalanced dynein-dependent 
cortical pulling forces. Our work reveals an unappreciated role for the 
Astrin/SKAP complex as an astral microtubule mediator of mitotic spindle 
positioning.

© 2016 Kern et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201510117
PMCID: PMC4862331
PMID: 27138257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Biol Cell. 2018 Sep 15;29(19):2336-2345. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E18-07-0418. Epub 
2018 Jul 19.

Nde1 promotes diverse dynein functions through differential interactions and 
exhibits an isoform-specific proteasome association.

Monda JK(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.

Nde1 is a key regulator of cytoplasmic dynein, binding directly to both dynein 
itself and the dynein adaptor, Lis1. Nde1 and Lis1 are thought to function 
together to promote dynein function, yet mutations in each result in distinct 
neurodevelopment phenotypes. To reconcile these phenotypic differences, we 
sought to dissect the contribution of Nde1 to dynein regulation and explore the 
cellular functions of Nde1. Here we show that an Nde1-Lis1 interaction is 
required for spindle pole focusing and Golgi organization but is largely 
dispensable for centrosome placement, despite Lis1 itself being required. Thus, 
diverse functions of dynein rely on distinct Nde1- and Lis1-mediated regulatory 
mechanisms. Additionally, we discovered a robust, isoform-specific interaction 
between human Nde1 and the 26S proteasome and identify precise mutations in Nde1 
that disrupt the proteasome interaction. Together, our work suggests that Nde1 
makes unique contributions to human neurodevelopment through its regulation of 
both dynein and proteasome function.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E18-07-0418
PMCID: PMC6249811
PMID: 30024347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Cell Sci. 2018 Aug 16;131(16):jcs214577. doi: 10.1242/jcs.214577.

The kinetochore-microtubule interface at a glance.

Monda JK(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Accurate chromosome segregation critically depends on the formation of 
attachments between microtubule polymers and each sister chromatid. The 
kinetochore is the macromolecular complex that assembles at the centromere of 
each chromosome during mitosis and serves as the link between the DNA and the 
microtubules. In this Cell Science at a Glance article and accompanying poster, 
we discuss the activities and molecular players that are involved in generating 
kinetochore-microtubule attachments, including the initial stages of lateral 
kinetochore-microtubule interactions and maturation to stabilized end-on 
attachments. We additionally explore the features that contribute to the ability 
of the kinetochore to track with dynamic microtubules. Finally, we examine the 
contributions of microtubule-associated proteins to the organization and 
stabilization of the mitotic spindle and the control of microtubule dynamics.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.214577
PMCID: PMC6127730
PMID: 30115751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.


50. Dev Cell. 2020 Nov 9;55(3):259-271. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2020.09.029.

Cellular Mechanisms and Regulation of Quiescence.

Marescal O(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Quiescence is a state of reversible proliferative arrest in which cells are not 
actively dividing and yet retain the capacity to reenter the cell cycle upon 
receiving an appropriate stimulus. Quiescent cells are remarkably diverse-they 
reside in different locations throughout the body, serve distinct roles, and are 
activated by a variety of signals. Despite this diversity, all quiescent cells 
must be able to persist in a nondividing state without compromising their 
proliferative potential, which requires changes to core cellular programs. How 
drastically different cell types are able to implement extensive changes to 
their gene-expression programs, metabolism, and cellular structures to induce a 
common cellular state is a fascinating question in cell and developmental 
biology. In this review, we explore the diversity of quiescent cells and 
highlight the unifying characteristics that define the quiescent state.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2020.09.029
PMCID: PMC7665062
PMID: 33171109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests I.M.C. is a member of 
the Editorial Advisory Board for Developmental Cell.


51. Mol Biol Cell. 2021 Apr 15;32(8):712-721. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E20-11-0751. Epub 
2021 Feb 17.

Differential requirements for the CENP-O complex reveal parallel PLK1 
kinetochore recruitment pathways.

Nguyen AL(1), Fadel MD(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.

Similar to other core biological processes, the vast majority of cell division 
components are essential for viability across human cell lines. However, recent 
genome-wide screens have identified a number of proteins that exhibit cell 
line-specific essentiality. Defining the behaviors of these proteins is critical 
to our understanding of complex biological processes. Here, we harness 
differential essentiality to reveal the contributions of the four-subunit 
centromere-localized CENP-O complex, whose precise function has been difficult 
to define. Our results support a model in which the CENP-O complex and BUB1 act 
in parallel pathways to recruit a threshold level of PLK1 to mitotic 
kinetochores, ensuring accurate chromosome segregation. We demonstrate that 
targeted changes to either pathway sensitizes cells to the loss of the other 
component, resulting in cell-state dependent requirements. This approach also 
highlights the advantage of comparing phenotypes across diverse cell lines to 
define critical functional contributions and behaviors that could be exploited 
for the targeted treatment of disease.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E20-11-0751
PMCID: PMC8108507
PMID: 33596090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Sep;117:62-74. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.03.008. Epub 
2021 Mar 19.

Kinetochore assembly throughout the cell cycle.

Navarro AP(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The kinetochore plays an essential role in facilitating chromosome segregation 
during cell division. This massive protein complex assembles onto the centromere 
of chromosomes and enables their attachment to spindle microtubules during 
mitosis. The kinetochore also functions as a signaling hub to regulate cell 
cycle progression, and is crucial to ensuring the fidelity of chromosome 
segregation. Despite the fact that kinetochores are large and robust molecular 
assemblies, they are also highly dynamic structures that undergo structural and 
organizational changes throughout the cell cycle. This review will highlight our 
current understanding of kinetochore structure and function, focusing on the 
dynamic processes that underlie kinetochore assembly.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.03.008
PMCID: PMC8384650
PMID: 33753005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none


53. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Feb;19(2):587-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-10-1051. Epub 2007 
Nov 28.

KNL1 and the CENP-H/I/K complex coordinately direct kinetochore assembly in 
vertebrates.

Cheeseman IM(1), Hori T, Fukagawa T, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, and Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 
icheese@wi.mit.edu

Chromosome segregation during mitosis requires the assembly of a large 
proteinaceous structure termed the kinetochore. In Caenorhabditis elegans, KNL-1 
is required to target multiple outer kinetochore proteins. Here, we demonstrate 
that the vertebrate KNL1 counterpart is essential for chromosome segregation and 
is required to localize a subset of outer kinetochore proteins. However, unlike 
in C. elegans, depletion of vertebrate KNL1 does not abolish kinetochore 
localization of the microtubule-binding Ndc80 complex. Instead, we show that 
KNL1 and CENP-K, a subunit of a constitutively centromere-associated complex 
that is missing from C. elegans, coordinately direct Ndc80 complex localization. 
Simultaneously reducing both hKNL1 and CENP-K function abolishes all aspects of 
kinetochore assembly downstream of centromeric chromatin and causes catastrophic 
chromosome segregation defects. These findings explain discrepancies in 
kinetochore assembly pathways between different organisms and reveal a 
surprising plasticity in the assembly mechanism of an essential cell division 
organelle.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-10-1051
PMCID: PMC2230600
PMID: 18045986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;9(1):33-46. doi: 10.1038/nrm2310.

Molecular architecture of the kinetochore-microtubule interface.

Cheeseman IM(1), Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02142, USA. icheese@wi.mit.edu

Segregation of the replicated genome during cell division in eukaryotes requires 
the kinetochore to link centromeric DNA to spindle microtubules. The kinetochore 
is composed of a number of conserved protein complexes that direct its 
specification and assembly, bind to spindle microtubules and regulate chromosome 
segregation. Recent studies have identified more than 80 kinetochore components, 
and are revealing how these proteins are organized into the higher order 
kinetochore structure, as well as how they function to achieve proper chromosome 
segregation.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm2310
PMID: 18097444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Cell Biol. 2010 Oct 18;191(2):269-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201006129. Epub 2010 
Oct 11.

Aurora B kinase controls the targeting of the Astrin-SKAP complex to bioriented 
kinetochores.

Schmidt JC(1), Kiyomitsu T, Hori T, Backer CB, Fukagawa T, Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

During mitosis, kinetochores play multiple roles to generate interactions with 
microtubules, and direct chromosome congression, biorientation, error 
correction, and anaphase segregation. However, it is unclear what changes at the 
kinetochore facilitate these distinct activities. Here, we describe a complex of 
the spindle- and kinetochore-associated protein Astrin, the small 
kinetochore-associated protein (SKAP), and the dynein light chain LC8. Although 
most dynein-associated proteins localize to unaligned kinetochores in an Aurora 
B-dependent manner, Astrin, SKAP, and LC8 localization is antagonized by Aurora 
B such that they target exclusively to bioriented kinetochores. 
Astrin-SKAP-depleted cells fail to maintain proper chromosome alignment, 
resulting in a spindle assembly checkpoint-dependent mitotic delay. Consistent 
with a role in stabilizing bioriented attachments, Astrin and SKAP bind directly 
to microtubules and are required for CLASP localization to kinetochores. In 
total, our results suggest that tension-dependent Aurora B phosphorylation can 
act to control outer kinetochore composition to provide distinct activities to 
prometaphase and metaphase kinetochores.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201006129
PMCID: PMC2958477
PMID: 20937697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Dec;23(24):4786-95. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0214. Epub 2012 
Oct 19.

The microtubule-binding protein Cep170 promotes the targeting of the kinesin-13 
depolymerase Kif2b to the mitotic spindle.

Welburn JP(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Julie.Welburn@ed.ac.uk

Microtubule dynamics are essential throughout mitosis to ensure correct 
chromosome segregation. Microtubule depolymerization is controlled in part by 
microtubule depolymerases, including the kinesin-13 family of proteins. In 
humans, there are three closely related kinesin-13 isoforms (Kif2a, Kif2b, and 
Kif2c/MCAK), which are highly conserved in their primary sequences but display 
distinct localization and nonoverlapping functions. Here we demonstrate that the 
N-terminus is a primary determinant of kinesin-13 localization. However, we also 
find that differences in the C-terminus alter the properties of kinesin-13, in 
part by facilitating unique protein-protein interactions. We identify the 
spindle-localized proteins Cep170 and Cep170R (KIAA0284) as specifically 
associating with Kif2b. Cep170 binds to microtubules in vitro and provides Kif2b 
with a second microtubule-binding site to target it to the spindle. Thus the 
intrinsic properties of kinesin-13s and extrinsic factors such as their 
associated proteins result in the diversity and specificity within the 
kinesin-13 depolymerase family.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0214
PMCID: PMC3521686
PMID: 23087211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Jan 15;26(2):229-37. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1125. Epub 2014 
Nov 19.

The outer kinetochore protein KNL-1 contains a defined oligomerization domain in 
nematodes.

Kern DM(1), Kim T(2), Rigney M(3), Hattersley N(2), Desai A(2), Cheeseman IM(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The kinetochore is a large, macromolecular assembly that is essential for 
connecting chromosomes to microtubules during mitosis. Despite the recent 
identification of multiple kinetochore components, the nature and organization 
of the higher-order kinetochore structure remain unknown. The outer kinetochore 
KNL-1/Mis12 complex/Ndc80 complex (KMN) network plays a key role in generating 
and sensing microtubule attachments. Here we demonstrate that Caenorhabditis 
elegans KNL-1 exists as an oligomer, and we identify a specific domain in KNL-1 
responsible for this activity. An N-terminal KNL-1 domain from both C. elegans 
and the related nematode Caenorhabditis remanei oligomerizes into a decameric 
assembly that appears roughly circular when visualized by electron microscopy. 
On the basis of sequence and mutational analysis, we identify a small 
hydrophobic region as responsible for this oligomerization activity. However, 
mutants that precisely disrupt KNL-1 oligomerization did not alter KNL-1 
localization or result in the loss of embryonic viability based on gene 
replacements in C. elegans. In C. elegans, KNL-1 oligomerization may coordinate 
with other kinetochore activities to ensure the proper organization, function, 
and sensory capabilities of the kinetochore-microtubule attachment.

© 2015 Kern et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is 
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1125
PMCID: PMC4294671
PMID: 25411336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Biol. 2017 Dec 4;27(23):3666-3675.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.018. Epub 
2017 Nov 16.

Microtubule Tip Tracking by the Spindle and Kinetochore Protein Ska1 Requires 
Diverse Tubulin-Interacting Surfaces.

Monda JK(1), Whitney IP(2), Tarasovetc EV(3), Wilson-Kubalek E(4), Milligan 
RA(4), Grishchuk EL(5), Cheeseman IM(6).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Center for Theoretical Problems of 
Physicochemical Pharmacology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(6)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The macromolecular kinetochore functions to generate interactions between 
chromosomal DNA and spindle microtubules [1]. To facilitate chromosome movement 
and segregation, kinetochores must maintain associations with both growing and 
shrinking microtubule ends. It is critical to define the proteins and their 
properties that allow kinetochores to associate with dynamic microtubules. The 
kinetochore-localized human Ska1 complex binds to microtubules and tracks with 
depolymerizing microtubule ends [2]. We now demonstrate that the Ska1 complex 
also autonomously tracks with growing microtubule ends in vitro, a key property 
that would allow this complex to act at kinetochores to mediate persistent 
associations with dynamic microtubules. To define the basis for Ska1 complex 
interactions with dynamic microtubules, we investigated the tubulin-binding 
properties of the Ska1 microtubule binding domain. In addition to binding to the 
microtubule lattice and dolastatin-induced protofilament-like structures, we 
demonstrate that the Ska1 microtubule binding domain can associate with soluble 
tubulin heterodimers and promote assembly of oligomeric ring-like tubulin 
structures. We generated mutations on distinct surfaces of the Ska1 microtubule 
binding domain that disrupt binding to soluble tubulin but do not prevent 
microtubule binding. These mutants display compromised microtubule tracking 
activity in vitro and result in defective chromosome alignment and mitotic 
progression in cells using a CRISPR/Cas9-based replacement assay. Our work 
supports a model in which multiple surfaces of Ska1 interact with diverse 
tubulin substrates to associate with dynamic microtubule polymers and facilitate 
optimal chromosome segregation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.018
PMCID: PMC5726585
PMID: 29153323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Cell. 2021 Aug 9;56(15):2192-2206.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2021.06.019. 
Epub 2021 Jul 30.

Separase cleaves the kinetochore protein Meikin at the meiosis I/II transition.

Maier NK(1), Ma J(2), Lampson MA(3), Cheeseman IM(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, School of Arts and Sciences, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, School of Arts and Sciences, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
lampson@sas.upenn.edu.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

To generate haploid gametes, germ cells undergo two consecutive meiotic 
divisions requiring key changes to the cell division machinery. Here, we 
demonstrate that the protease separase rewires key cell division processes at 
the meiosis I/II transition by cleaving the meiosis-specific protein Meikin. 
Separase proteolysis does not inactivate Meikin but instead alters its function 
to create a distinct activity state. Full-length Meikin and the C-terminal 
Meikin separase cleavage product both localize to kinetochores, bind to Plk1 
kinase, and promote Rec8 cleavage, but our results reveal distinct roles for 
these proteins in controlling meiosis. Mutations that prevent Meikin cleavage or 
that conditionally inactivate Meikin at anaphase I result in defective meiosis 
II chromosome alignment in mouse oocytes. Finally, as oocytes exit meiosis, 
C-Meikin is eliminated by APC/C-mediated degradation prior to the first mitotic 
division. Thus, multiple regulatory events irreversibly modulate Meikin activity 
during successive meiotic divisions to rewire the cell division machinery at two 
distinct transitions.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2021.06.019
PMCID: PMC8355204
PMID: 34331869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests I.M.C. is a member of 
the Editorial Advisory Board for Developmental Cell.


60. Nat Cell Biol. 2024 Jan;26(1):45-56. doi: 10.1038/s41556-023-01313-7. Epub 2024 
Jan 2.

Higher-order protein assembly controls kinetochore formation.

Sissoko GB(#)(1)(2), Tarasovetc EV(#)(3), Marescal O(1)(2), Grishchuk EL(4), 
Cheeseman IM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. gekate@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.
(6)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. icheese@wi.mit.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

To faithfully segregate chromosomes during vertebrate mitosis, 
kinetochore-microtubule interactions must be restricted to a single site on each 
chromosome. Prior work on pair-wise kinetochore protein interactions has been 
unable to identify the mechanisms that prevent outer kinetochore formation in 
regions with a low density of CENP-A nucleosomes. To investigate the impact of 
higher-order assembly on kinetochore formation, we generated oligomers of the 
inner kinetochore protein CENP-T using two distinct, genetically engineered 
systems in human cells. Although individual CENP-T molecules interact poorly 
with outer kinetochore proteins, oligomers that mimic centromeric CENP-T density 
trigger the robust formation of functional, cytoplasmic kinetochore-like 
particles. Both in cells and in vitro, each molecule of oligomerized CENP-T 
recruits substantially higher levels of outer kinetochore components than 
monomeric CENP-T molecules. Our work suggests that the density dependence of 
CENP-T restricts outer kinetochore recruitment to centromeres, where densely 
packed CENP-A recruits a high local concentration of inner kinetochore proteins.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-023-01313-7
PMCID: PMC10842828
PMID: 38168769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests Statement The authors have 
no competing interests.


61. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2011 Feb;23(1):102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2010.07.007. Epub 
2010 Aug 9.

Kinetochore assembly: if you build it, they will come.

Gascoigne KE(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 
02142, United States. karengas@wi.mit.edu

Accurate chromosome segregation requires the interaction of chromosomes with the 
microtubules from the mitotic spindle. This interaction is mediated by the 
macro-molecular kinetochore complex, which assembles only at the centromeric 
region of each chromosome. However, how this site is specified and how assembly 
of the kinetochore structure is regulated in coordination with cell cycle 
progression remains unclear. Recent studies have begun to shed light on the 
mechanisms underlying assembly of this complex structure.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceb.2010.07.007
PMCID: PMC2980799
PMID: 20702077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Feb 12;14(3):311-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb2440.

Chromosome- and spindle-pole-derived signals generate an intrinsic code for 
spindle position and orientation.

Kiyomitsu T(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, 
USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Mar 13;22(3):475-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.02.012.

Mitotic spindle positioning by cortical pulling forces defines the cell division 
axis and location, which is critical for proper cell division and development. 
Although recent work has identified developmental and extrinsic cues that 
regulate spindle orientation, the contribution of intrinsic signals to spindle 
positioning and orientation remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that cortical 
force generation in human cells is controlled by distinct spindle-pole- and 
chromosome-derived signals that regulate cytoplasmic dynein localization. First, 
dynein exhibits a dynamic asymmetric cortical localization that is negatively 
regulated by spindle-pole proximity, resulting in spindle oscillations to centre 
the spindle within the cell. We find that this signal comprises the 
spindle-pole-localized polo-like kinase (Plk1), which regulates dynein 
localization by controlling the interaction between dynein-dynactin and its 
upstream cortical targeting factors NuMA and LGN. Second, a chromosome-derived 
RanGTP gradient restricts the localization of NuMA-LGN to the lateral cell 
cortex to define and maintain the spindle orientation axis. RanGTP acts in part 
through the nuclear localization sequence of NuMA to locally alter the ability 
of NuMA-LGN to associate with the cell cortex in the vicinity of chromosomes. We 
propose that these chromosome- and spindle-pole-derived gradients generate an 
intrinsic code to control spindle position and orientation.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2440
PMCID: PMC3290711
PMID: 22327364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Jan;17(1):16-29. doi: 10.1038/nrm.2015.5. Epub 2015 
Nov 25.

The molecular basis for centromere identity and function.

McKinley KL(1), Cheeseman IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, MIT, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

The centromere is the region of the chromosome that directs its segregation in 
mitosis and meiosis. Although the functional importance of the centromere has 
been appreciated for more than 130 years, elucidating the molecular features and 
properties that enable centromeres to orchestrate chromosome segregation is an 
ongoing challenge. Most eukaryotic centromeres are defined epigenetically and 
require the presence of nucleosomes containing the histone H3 variant centromere 
protein A (CENP-A; also known as CENH3). Ongoing work is providing important 
molecular insights into the central requirements for centromere identity and 
propagation, and the mechanisms by which centromeres recruit kinetochores to 
connect to spindle microtubules.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm.2015.5
PMCID: PMC8603311
PMID: 26601620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell. 2020 Apr 2;78(1):127-140.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.01.023. Epub 
2020 Feb 7.

Cohesin Removal Reprograms Gene Expression upon Mitotic Entry.

Perea-Resa C(1), Bury L(2), Cheeseman IM(2), Blower MD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main St., Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA. Electronic address: blower@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

As cells enter mitosis, the genome is restructured to facilitate chromosome 
segregation, accompanied by dramatic changes in gene expression. However, the 
mechanisms that underlie mitotic transcriptional regulation are unclear. In 
contrast to transcribed genes, centromere regions retain transcriptionally 
active RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in mitosis. Here, we demonstrate that 
chromatin-bound cohesin is necessary to retain elongating Pol II at centromeres. 
We find that WAPL-mediated removal of cohesin from chromosome arms during 
prophase is required for the dissociation of Pol II and nascent transcripts, and 
failure of this process dramatically alters mitotic gene expression. Removal of 
cohesin/Pol II from chromosome arms in prophase is important for 
accurate chromosome segregation and normal activation of gene expression in G1. 
We propose that prophase cohesin removal is a key step in reprogramming gene 
expression as cells transition from G2 through mitosis to G1.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.01.023
PMCID: PMC7178822
PMID: 32035037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


65. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Sep 1;33(10):ar87. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E22-06-0239. Epub 2022 
Jul 13.

Dynamic cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation modulates CENP-L-CENP-N centromere 
recruitment.

Navarro AP(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.

The kinetochore is a macromolecular structure that is needed to ensure proper 
chromosome segregation during each cellular division. The kinetochore is 
assembled upon a platform of the 16-subunit constitutive centromere-associated 
network (CCAN), which is present at centromeres throughout the cell cycle. The 
nature and regulation of CCAN assembly, interactions, and dynamics needed to 
facilitate changing centromere properties and requirements remain to be fully 
elucidated. The CENP-LN complex is a CCAN component that displays unique cell 
cycle-dependent localization behavior, peaking in the S phase. Here, we 
demonstrate that phosphorylation of CENP-L and CENP-N controls CENP-LN complex 
formation and localization in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Mimicking 
constitutive phosphorylation of either CENP-L or CENP-N or simultaneously 
preventing phosphorylation of both proteins prevents CENP-LN localization and 
disrupts chromosome segregation. Our work suggests that cycles of 
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are critical for CENP-LN complex 
recruitment and dynamics at kinetochores to enable cell cycle-dependent CCAN 
reorganization.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E22-06-0239
PMCID: PMC9582625
PMID: 35830614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Oct 1;33(12):ar110. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0091. Epub 2022 
Aug 3.

Identification of a Golgi-localized peptide reveals a minimal Golgi-targeting 
motif.

Navarro AP(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.

Prior work has identified signal sequences and motifs that are necessary and 
sufficient to target proteins to specific subcellular regions and organelles 
such as the plasma membrane, nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, and mitochondria. 
In contrast, minimal sequence motifs that are sufficient for Golgi localization 
remain largely elusive. In this work, we identified a 37-amino acid alternative 
open reading frame (altORF) within the mRNA of the centromere protein CENP-R. 
This altORF peptide localizes specifically to the cytoplasmic surface of the 
Golgi apparatus. Through mutational analysis, we identify a minimal 10-amino 
acid sequence and a critical cysteine residue that are necessary and sufficient 
for Golgi localization. Pharmacological perturbations suggest that this peptide 
undergoes lipid modification to promote its localization. Together, our work 
defines a minimal sequence that is sufficient for Golgi targeting and provide a 
valuable Golgi marker for live cell imaging.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E22-03-0091
PMCID: PMC9635300
PMID: 35921174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cell Biol. 2009 Jul 27;186(2):173-82. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200903100. Epub 2009 
Jul 20.

The CENP-S complex is essential for the stable assembly of outer kinetochore 
structure.

Amano M(1), Suzuki A, Hori T, Backer C, Okawa K, Cheeseman IM, Fukagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

The constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN) proteins are central to 
kinetochore assembly. To define the molecular architecture of this critical 
kinetochore network, we sought to determine the full complement of CCAN 
components and to define their relationships. This work identified a centromere 
protein S (CENP-S)-containing subcomplex that includes the new constitutive 
kinetochore protein CENP-X. Both CENP-S- and CENP-X-deficient chicken DT40 cells 
are viable but show abnormal mitotic behavior based on live cell analysis. Human 
HeLa cells depleted for CENP-X also showed mitotic errors. The kinetochore 
localization of CENP-S and -X is abolished in CENP-T- or CENP-K-deficient cells, 
but reciprocal experiments using CENP-S-deficient cells did not reveal defects 
in the localization of CCAN components. However, CENP-S- and CENP-X-deficient 
cells show a significant reduction in the size of the kinetochore outer plate. 
In addition, we found that intrakinetochore distance was increased in CENP-S- 
and CENP-X-deficient cells. These results suggest that the CENP-S complex is 
essential for the stable assembly of the outer kinetochore.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200903100
PMCID: PMC2717651
PMID: 19620631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 2;25(5):671-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.059. Epub 2015 Feb 
5.

Distinct organization and regulation of the outer kinetochore KMN network 
downstream of CENP-C and CENP-T.

Rago F(1), Gascoigne KE(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, MIT, 
Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, MIT, 
Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The kinetochore provides a vital connection between chromosomes and spindle 
microtubules [1, 2]. Defining the molecular architecture of the core kinetochore 
components is critical for understanding the mechanisms by which the kinetochore 
directs chromosome segregation. The KNL1/Mis12 complex/Ndc80 complex (KMN) 
network acts as the primary microtubule-binding interface at kinetochores [3] 
and provides a platform to recruit regulatory proteins [4]. Recent work found 
that the inner kinetochore components CENP-C and CENP-T act in parallel to 
recruit the KMN network to kinetochores [5-8]. However, due to the presence of 
these dual pathways, it has not been possible to distinguish differences in the 
nature of kinetochore assembly downstream of CENP-C or CENP-T. Here, we 
separated these pathways by targeting CENP-C and CENP-T independently to an 
ectopic chromosomal locus in human cells. Our work reveals that the organization 
of the KMN network components downstream of CENP-C and CENP-T is distinct. 
CENP-C recruits the Ndc80 complex through its interactions with KNL1 and the 
Mis12 complex. In contrast, CENP-T directly interacts with Ndc80, which in turn 
promotes KNL1/Mis12 complex recruitment through a separate region on CENP-T, 
resulting in functional relationships for KMN network localization that are 
inverted relative to the CENP-C pathway. We also find that distinct regulatory 
paradigms control the assembly of these pathways, with Aurora B kinase promoting 
KMN network recruitment to CENP-C and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) regulating 
KMN network recruitment to CENP-T. This work reveals unexpected complexity for 
the architecture and regulation of the core components of the 
kinetochore-microtubule interface.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.059
PMCID: PMC4348146
PMID: 25660545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Curr Biol. 2019 Jan 7;29(1):104-119.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.054. Epub 
2018 Dec 27.

Ectopic Activation of the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint Signaling Cascade Reveals 
Its Biochemical Design.

Chen C(1), Whitney IP(2), Banerjee A(3), Sacristan C(4), Sekhri P(5), Kern 
DM(2), Fontan A(5), Kops GJPL(4), Tyson JJ(3), Cheeseman IM(2), Joglekar AP(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, MIT, 
Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State 
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(4)Hubrecht Institute - KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences), 
and Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Cell & Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(6)Department of Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; 
Cell & Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: ajitj@umich.edu.

Switch-like activation of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) is critical for 
accurate chromosome segregation and for cell division in a timely manner. To 
determine the mechanisms that achieve this, we engineered an ectopic, 
kinetochore-independent SAC activator: the "eSAC." The eSAC stimulates SAC 
signaling by artificially dimerizing Mps1 kinase domain and a cytosolic KNL1 
phosphodomain, the kinetochore signaling scaffold. By exploiting variable eSAC 
expression in a cell population, we defined the dependence of the eSAC-induced 
mitotic delay on eSAC concentration in a cell to reveal the dose-response 
behavior of the core signaling cascade of the SAC. These quantitative analyses 
and subsequent mathematical modeling of the dose-response data uncover two 
crucial properties of the core SAC signaling cascade: (1) a cellular limit on 
the maximum anaphase-inhibitory signal that the cascade can generate due to the 
limited supply of SAC proteins and (2) the ability of the KNL1 phosphodomain to 
produce the anaphase-inhibitory signal synergistically, when it recruits 
multiple SAC proteins simultaneously. We propose that these properties together 
achieve inverse, non-linear scaling between the signal output per kinetochore 
and the number of signaling kinetochores. When the number of kinetochores is 
low, synergistic signaling by KNL1 enables each kinetochore to produce a 
disproportionately strong signal output. However, when many kinetochores signal 
concurrently, they compete for a limited supply of SAC proteins. This frustrates 
synergistic signaling and lowers their signal output. Thus, the signaling 
activity of unattached kinetochores will adapt to the changing number of 
signaling kinetochores to enable the SAC to approximate switch-like behavior.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.054
PMCID: PMC6324986
PMID: 30595520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Curr Biol. 2020 Feb 24;30(4):R174-R177. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.12.058.

Chromosome Segregation: Evolving a Plastic Chromosome-Microtubule Interface.

Navarro AP(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, 
USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, 
USA. Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2020 Feb 24;30(4):561-572.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.12.014.

Despite a conserved requirement in mediating chromosome segregation, 
kinetochores display remarkable plasticity in their structure and composition. 
New work in holocentric insect species highlights the molecular rewiring that 
occurs when key structural components of the kinetochore are lost and centromere 
structure is changed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.12.058
PMID: 32097646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Biol Cell. 2021 Jun 15;32(13):1241-1255. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E20-07-0461. Epub 
2021 May 6.

Permitted and restricted steps of human kinetochore assembly in mitotic cell 
extracts.

Tarasovetc EV(1), Allu PK(2), Wimbish RT(3), DeLuca JG(3), Cheeseman IM(4), 
Black BE(2), Grishchuk EL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Penn Center for Genome Integrity, 
Epigenetics Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO 80523.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142.

Mitotic kinetochores assemble via the hierarchical recruitment of numerous 
cytosolic components to the centromere region of each chromosome. However, how 
these orderly and localized interactions are achieved without spurious 
macromolecular assemblies forming from soluble kinetochore components in the 
cell cytosol remains poorly understood. We developed assembly assays to monitor 
the recruitment of green fluorescent protein-tagged recombinant proteins and 
native proteins from human cell extracts to inner kinetochore components 
immobilized on microbeads. In contrast to prior work in yeast and Xenopus egg 
extracts, we find that human mitotic cell extracts fail to support de novo 
assembly of microtubule-binding subcomplexes. A subset of interactions, such as 
those between CENP-A-containing nucleosomes and CENP-C, are permissive under 
these conditions. However, the subsequent phospho-dependent binding of the Mis12 
complex is less efficient, whereas recruitment of the Ndc80 complex is blocked, 
leading to weak microtubule-binding activity of assembled particles. Using 
molecular variants of the Ndc80 complex, we show that auto-inhibition of native 
Ndc80 complex restricts its ability to bind to the CENP-T/W complex, whereas 
inhibition of the Ndc80 microtubule binding is driven by a different mechanism. 
Together, our work reveals regulatory mechanisms that guard against the spurious 
formation of cytosolic microtubule-binding kinetochore particles.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E20-07-0461
PMCID: PMC8351545
PMID: 33956511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014 Jul 1;6(7):a015826. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a015826.

The kinetochore.

Cheeseman IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, MIT Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142.

A critical requirement for mitosis is the distribution of genetic material to 
the two daughter cells. The central player in this process is the macromolecular 
kinetochore structure, which binds to both chromosomal DNA and spindle 
microtubule polymers to direct chromosome alignment and segregation. This review 
will discuss the key kinetochore activities required for mitotic chromosome 
segregation, including the recognition of a specific site on each chromosome, 
kinetochore assembly and the formation of kinetochore-microtubule connections, 
the generation of force to drive chromosome segregation, and the regulation of 
kinetochore function to ensure that chromosome segregation occurs with high 
fidelity.

Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a015826
PMCID: PMC4067989
PMID: 24984773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Curr Biol. 2015 Jul 20;25(14):R601-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.056.

Chromosome Segregation: A Spatial Code to Correct Kinetochore-Microtubule 
Attachments.

Monda JK(1), Cheeseman IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department 
of Biology, MIT, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department 
of Biology, MIT, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic 
address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2015 Jul 20;25(14):1835-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.013.
    Curr Biol. 2015 Jul 20;25(14):1842-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.021.

Erroneous kinetochore-microtubule interactions must be detected and corrected 
before a cell enters anaphase to prevent chromosome mis-segregation. Two new 
studies describe an Aurora A-mediated error correction mechanism based on the 
spatial position of a chromosome within the mitotic spindle.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.056
PMID: 26196485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Open Biol. 2018 Sep 26;8(9):180095. doi: 10.1098/rsob.180095.

Dynamic regulation of dynein localization revealed by small molecule inhibitors 
of ubiquitination enzymes.

Monda JK(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Cytoplasmic dynein is a minus-end-directed microtubule-based motor that acts at 
diverse subcellular sites. During mitosis, dynein localizes simultaneously to 
the mitotic spindle, spindle poles, kinetochores and the cell cortex. However, 
it is unclear what controls the relative targeting of dynein to these locations. 
As dynein is heavily post-translationally modified, we sought to test a role for 
these modifications in regulating dynein localization. We find that dynein 
rapidly and strongly accumulates at mitotic spindle poles following treatment 
with NSC697923, a small molecule that inhibits the ubiquitin E2 enzyme, Ubc13, 
or treatment with PYR-41, a ubiquitin E1 inhibitor. Subsets of dynein regulators 
such as Lis1, ZW10 and Spindly accumulate at the spindle poles, whereas others 
do not, suggesting that NSC697923 differentially affects specific dynein 
populations. We additionally find that dynein relocalization induced by 
NSC697923 or PYR-41 can be suppressed by simultaneous treatment with the 
non-selective deubiquitinase inhibitor, PR-619. However, we did not observe 
altered dynein localization following treatment with the selective E1 inhibitor, 
TAK-243. Although it is possible that off-target effects of NSC697923 and PYR-41 
are responsible for the observed changes in dynein localization, the rapid 
relocalization upon drug treatment highlights the highly dynamic nature of 
dynein regulation during mitosis.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.180095
PMCID: PMC6170511
PMID: 30257893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have no competing interests.


75. Curr Biol. 2012 Oct 9;22(19):R842-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.08.001.

Kinetochore structure: pulling answers from yeast.

Kern DM(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Sep;19(9):925-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2358.

Despite the identification of multiple kinetochore proteins, their structure 
and organization has remained unclear. New work uses electron microscopy 
to visualize isolated budding yeast kinetochore particles and reveal the 
kinetochore structure on microtubules.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.08.001
PMID: 23058804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):148-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.025. Epub 2009 
Oct 21.

The Zn finger protein Iguana impacts Hedgehog signaling by promoting 
ciliogenesis.

Glazer AM(1), Wilkinson AW, Backer CB, Lapan SW, Gutzman JH, Cheeseman IM, 
Reddien PW.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is critical for metazoan development and requires cilia for 
pathway activity. The gene iguana was discovered in zebrafish as required for 
Hedgehog signaling, and encodes a novel Zn finger protein. Planarians are 
flatworms with robust regenerative capacities and utilize epidermal cilia for 
locomotion. RNA interference of Smed-iguana in the planarian Schmidtea 
mediterranea caused cilia loss and failure to regenerate new cilia, but did not 
cause defects similar to those observed in hedgehog(RNAi) animals. Smed-iguana 
gene expression was also similar in pattern to the expression of multiple other 
ciliogenesis genes, but was not required for expression of these ciliogenesis 
genes. iguana-defective zebrafish had too few motile cilia in pronephric ducts 
and in Kupffer's vesicle. Kupffer's vesicle promotes left-right asymmetry and 
iguana mutant embryos had left-right asymmetry defects. Finally, human Iguana 
proteins (dZIP1 and dZIP1L) localize to the basal bodies of primary cilia and, 
together, are required for primary cilia formation. Our results indicate that a 
critical and broadly conserved function for Iguana is in ciliogenesis and that 
this function has come to be required for Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.025
PMCID: PMC2799895
PMID: 19852954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nat Commun. 2019 Jul 22;10(1):3262. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11194-w.

The AAA + ATPase TorsinA polymerizes into hollow helical tubes with 8.5 subunits 
per turn.

Demircioglu FE(1), Zheng W(2), McQuown AJ(3), Maier NK(1)(4), Watson N(5), 
Cheeseman IM(1)(4), Denic V(3), Egelman EH(2), Schwartz TU(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
02139, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, 02138, USA.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(5)W. M. Keck Microscopy Facility, The Whitehead Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
02142, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
02139, USA. tus@mit.edu.

TorsinA is an ER-resident AAA + ATPase, whose deletion of glutamate E303 results 
in the genetic neuromuscular disease primary dystonia. TorsinA is an unusual 
AAA + ATPase that needs an external activator. Also, it likely does not thread a 
peptide substrate through a narrow central channel, in contrast to its closest 
structural homologs. Here, we examined the oligomerization of TorsinA to get 
closer to a molecular understanding of its still enigmatic function. We observe 
TorsinA to form helical filaments, which we analyzed by cryo-electron microscopy 
using helical reconstruction. The 4.4 Å structure reveals long hollow tubes with 
a helical periodicity of 8.5 subunits per turn, and an inner channel of ~ 4 nm 
diameter. We further show that the protein is able to induce tubulation of 
membranes in vitro, an observation that may reflect an entirely new 
characteristic of AAA + ATPases. We discuss the implications of these 
observations for TorsinA function.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-11194-w
PMCID: PMC6646356
PMID: 31332180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


78. J Cell Biol. 2010 Mar 22;188(6):809-20. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201001006. Epub 2010 
Mar 15.

Regulated targeting of protein phosphatase 1 to the outer kinetochore by KNL1 
opposes Aurora B kinase.

Liu D(1), Vleugel M, Backer CB, Hori T, Fukagawa T, Cheeseman IM, Lampson MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2012 Aug 20;198(4):477-9. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201207145.

Regulated interactions between kinetochores and spindle microtubules are 
essential to maintain genomic stability during chromosome segregation. The 
Aurora B kinase phosphorylates kinetochore substrates to destabilize 
kinetochore-microtubule interactions and eliminate incorrect attachments. These 
substrates must be dephosphorylated to stabilize correct attachments, but how 
opposing kinase and phosphatase activities are coordinated at the kinetochore is 
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that a conserved motif in the kinetochore protein 
KNL1 directly interacts with and targets protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) to the 
outer kinetochore. PP1 recruitment by KNL1 is required to dephosphorylate Aurora 
B substrates at kinetochores and stabilize microtubule attachments. PP1 levels 
at kinetochores are regulated and inversely proportional to local Aurora B 
activity. Indeed, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of KNL1 by Aurora B 
disrupts the KNL1-PP1 interaction. In total, our results support a positive 
feedback mechanism by which Aurora B activity at kinetochores not only targets 
substrates directly, but also prevents localization of the opposing phosphatase.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201001006
PMCID: PMC2845083
PMID: 20231380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nature. 2023 May;617(7959):154-161. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05943-7. Epub 2023 
Apr 26.

Alternative CDC20 translational isoforms tune mitotic arrest duration.

Tsang MJ(1)(2), Cheeseman IM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
icheese@wi.mit.edu.
(4)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA. icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Nature. 2023 May;617(7959):39-40. doi: 10.1038/d41586-023-01355-9.

Mitotic defects activate the spindle-assembly checkpoint, which inhibits the 
anaphase-promoting complex co-activator CDC20 to induce a prolonged cell cycle 
arrest1,2. Once errors are corrected, the spindle-assembly checkpoint is 
silenced, allowing anaphase onset to occur. However, in the presence of 
persistent unresolvable errors, cells can undergo 'mitotic slippage', exiting 
mitosis into a tetraploid G1 state and escaping the cell death that results from 
a prolonged arrest. The molecular logic that enables cells to balance these 
duelling mitotic arrest and slippage behaviours remains unclear. Here we 
demonstrate that human cells modulate the duration of their mitotic arrest 
through the presence of conserved, alternative CDC20 translational isoforms. 
Downstream translation initiation results in a truncated CDC20 isoform that is 
resistant to spindle-assembly-checkpoint-mediated inhibition and promotes 
mitotic exit even in the presence of mitotic perturbations. Our study supports a 
model in which the relative levels of CDC20 translational isoforms control the 
duration of mitotic arrest. During a prolonged mitotic arrest, new protein 
synthesis and differential CDC20 isoform turnover create a timer, with mitotic 
exit occurring once the truncated Met43 isoform achieves sufficient levels. 
Targeted molecular changes or naturally occurring cancer mutations that alter 
CDC20 isoform ratios or its translational control modulate mitotic arrest 
duration and anti-mitotic drug sensitivity, with potential implications for the 
diagnosis and treatment of human cancers.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-05943-7
PMCID: PMC10461078
PMID: 37100900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Curr Biol. 2018 Nov 5;28(21):3422-3429.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.006. Epub 
2018 Oct 25.

Distinct Roles of RZZ and Bub1-KNL1 in Mitotic Checkpoint Signaling and 
Kinetochore Expansion.

Rodriguez-Rodriguez JA(1), Lewis C(1), McKinley KL(2), Sikirzhytski V(3), Corona 
J(1), Maciejowski J(1), Khodjakov A(3), Cheeseman IM(2), Jallepalli PV(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12201, USA; 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA.
(4)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA. Electronic address: 
jallepap@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2018 Nov 5;28(21):R1250-R1252. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.001.

The Mad1-Mad2 heterodimer is the catalytic hub of the spindle assembly 
checkpoint (SAC), which controls M phase progression through a multi-subunit 
anaphase inhibitor, the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) [1, 2]. During 
interphase, Mad1-Mad2 generates MCC at nuclear pores [3]. After nuclear envelope 
breakdown (NEBD), kinetochore-associated Mad1-Mad2 catalyzes MCC assembly until 
all chromosomes achieve bipolar attachment [1, 2]. Mad1-Mad2 and other factors 
are also incorporated into the fibrous corona, a phospho-dependent expansion of 
the outer kinetochore that precedes microtubule attachment [4-6]. The factor(s) 
involved in targeting Mad1-Mad2 to kinetochores in higher eukaryotes remain 
controversial [7-12], and the specific phosphorylation event(s) that trigger 
corona formation remain elusive [5, 13]. We used genome editing to eliminate 
Bub1, KNL1, and the Rod-Zw10-Zwilch (RZZ) complex in human cells. We show that 
RZZ's sole role in SAC activation is to tether Mad1-Mad2 to kinetochores. 
Separately, Mps1 kinase triggers fibrous corona formation by phosphorylating two 
N-terminal sites on Rod. In contrast, Bub1 and KNL1 activate kinetochore-bound 
Mad1-Mad2 to produce a "wait anaphase" signal but are not required for corona 
formation. We also show that clonal lines isolated after BUB1 disruption recover 
Bub1 expression and SAC function through nonsense-associated alternative 
splicing (NAS). Our study reveals a fundamental division of labor in the 
mammalian SAC and highlights a transcriptional response to nonsense mutations 
that can reduce or eliminate penetrance in genome editing experiments.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.006
PMCID: PMC6522255
PMID: 30415700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


81. Chromosome Res. 2013 Jul;21(4):407-18. doi: 10.1007/s10577-013-9368-6. Epub 2013 
Jun 22.

Induced dicentric chromosome formation promotes genomic rearrangements and 
tumorigenesis.

Gascoigne KE(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements can radically alter gene products and their function, 
driving tumor formation or progression. However, the molecular origins and 
evolution of such rearrangements are varied and poorly understood, with cancer 
cells often containing multiple, complex rearrangements. One mechanism that can 
lead to genomic rearrangements is the formation of a "dicentric" chromosome 
containing two functional centromeres. Indeed, such dicentric chromosomes have 
been observed in cancer cells. Here, we tested the ability of a single dicentric 
chromosome to contribute to genomic instability and neoplastic conversion in 
vertebrate cells. We developed a system to transiently and reversibly induce 
dicentric chromosome formation on a single chromosome with high temporal 
control. We find that induced dicentric chromosomes are frequently damaged and 
mis-segregated during mitosis, and that this leads to extensive chromosomal 
rearrangements including translocations with other chromosomes. Populations of 
pre-neoplastic cells in which a single dicentric chromosome is induced acquire 
extensive genomic instability and display hallmarks of cellular transformation 
including anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Our results suggest that a 
single dicentric chromosome could contribute to tumor initiation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10577-013-9368-6
PMCID: PMC3713265
PMID: 23793898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Curr Biol. 2021 Dec 20;31(24):5633-5641.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.022. Epub 
2021 Nov 4.

Polarized Dishevelled dissolution and reassembly drives embryonic axis 
specification in sea star oocytes.

Swartz SZ(1), Tan TH(2), Perillo M(3), Fakhri N(2), Wessel GM(3), Wikramanayake 
AH(4), Cheeseman IM(5).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Embryology Course: Concepts and Techniques in Modern Developmental Biology, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA. Electronic address: 
szs@wi.mit.edu.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Physics, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(3)MCB Department, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33134, USA; 
Embryology Course: Concepts and Techniques in Modern Developmental Biology, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Electronic address: icheese@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2021 Dec 20;31(24):R1582-R1585. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.060.

The organismal body axes that are formed during embryogenesis are intimately 
linked to intrinsic asymmetries established at the cellular scale in oocytes.1 
However, the mechanisms that generate cellular asymmetries within the oocyte and 
then transduce that polarity to organismal scale body axes are poorly understood 
outside of select model organisms. Here, we report an axis-defining event in 
meiotic oocytes of the sea star Patiria miniata. Dishevelled (Dvl) is a 
cytoplasmic Wnt pathway effector required for axis development in diverse 
species,2-4 but the mechanisms governing its function and distribution remain 
poorly defined. Using time-lapse imaging, we find that Dvl localizes uniformly 
to puncta throughout the cell cortex in Prophase I-arrested oocytes but becomes 
enriched at the vegetal pole following meiotic resumption through a 
dissolution-reassembly mechanism. This process is driven by an initial 
disassembly phase of Dvl puncta, followed by selective reformation of Dvl 
assemblies at the vegetal pole. Rather than being driven by Wnt signaling, this 
localization behavior is coupled to meiotic cell cycle progression and 
influenced by Lamp1+ endosome association and Frizzled receptors pre-localized 
within the oocyte cortex. Our results reveal a cell cycle-linked mechanism by 
which maternal cellular polarity is transduced to the embryo through spatially 
regulated Dvl dynamics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.10.022
PMCID: PMC8692449
PMID: 34739818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests I.M.C. is a member of 
the Editorial Advisory Board for Current Biology.


83. Cell. 2006 Dec 1;127(5):983-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.039.

The conserved KMN network constitutes the core microtubule-binding site of the 
kinetochore.

Cheeseman IM(1), Chappie JS, Wilson-Kubalek EM, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine (UCSD), CMM-East, Room 3052, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 
icheeseman@ucsd.edu

The microtubule-binding interface of the kinetochore is of central importance in 
chromosome segregation. Although kinetochore components that stabilize, 
translocate on, and affect the polymerization state of microtubules have been 
identified, none have proven essential for kinetochore-microtubule interactions. 
Here, we examined the conserved KNL-1/Mis12 complex/Ndc80 complex (KMN) network, 
which is essential for kinetochore-microtubule interactions in vivo. We 
identified two distinct microtubule-binding activities within the KMN network: 
one associated with the Ndc80/Nuf2 subunits of the Ndc80 complex, and a second 
in KNL-1. Formation of the complete KMN network, which additionally requires the 
Mis12 complex and the Spc24/Spc25 subunits of the Ndc80 complex, synergistically 
enhances microtubule-binding activity. Phosphorylation by Aurora B, which 
corrects improper kinetochore-microtubule connections in vivo, reduces the 
affinity of the Ndc80 complex for microtubules in vitro. Based on these 
findings, we propose that the conserved KMN network constitutes the core 
microtubule-binding site of the kinetochore.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.039
PMID: 17129783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Elife. 2021 Aug 3;10:e70588. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70588.

Selective dephosphorylation by PP2A-B55 directs the meiosis I-meiosis II 
transition in oocytes.

Swartz SZ(1)(2), Nguyen HT(3), McEwan BC(3), Adamo ME(4), Cheeseman IM(1)(2), 
Kettenbach AN(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, United States.
(4)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, 
United States.

Meiosis is a specialized cell cycle that requires sequential changes to the cell 
division machinery to facilitate changing functions. To define the mechanisms 
that enable the oocyte-to-embryo transition, we performed time-course proteomics 
in synchronized sea star oocytes from prophase I through the first embryonic 
cleavage. Although we found that protein levels were broadly stable, our 
analysis reveals that dynamic waves of phosphorylation underlie each meiotic 
stage. We found that the phosphatase PP2A-B55 is reactivated at the meiosis 
I/meiosis II (MI/MII) transition, resulting in the preferential 
dephosphorylation of threonine residues. Selective dephosphorylation is critical 
for directing the MI/MII transition as altering PP2A-B55 substrate preferences 
disrupts key cell cycle events after MI. In addition, threonine to serine 
substitution of a conserved phosphorylation site in the substrate INCENP 
prevents its relocalization at anaphase I. Thus, through its inherent 
phospho-threonine preference, PP2A-B55 imposes specific phosphoregulated 
behaviors that distinguish the two meiotic divisions.

© 2021, Swartz et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70588
PMCID: PMC8370769
PMID: 34342579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SS, HN, BM, MA, IC, AK No competing interests 
declared


85. Cell. 2008 Oct 17;135(2):322-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.038.

Fibrils connect microtubule tips with kinetochores: a mechanism to couple 
tubulin dynamics to chromosome motion.

McIntosh JR(1), Grishchuk EL, Morphew MK, Efremov AK, Zhudenkov K, Volkov VA, 
Cheeseman IM, Desai A, Mastronarde DN, Ataullakhanov FI.

Author information:
(1)Department of M.C.D. Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, 
USA. richard.mcintosh@colorado.edu

Comment in
    Cell. 2008 Oct 17;135(2):211-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.001.

Kinetochores of mitotic chromosomes are coupled to spindle microtubules in ways 
that allow the energy from tubulin dynamics to drive chromosome motion. Most 
kinetochore-associated microtubule ends display curving "protofilaments," 
strands of tubulin dimers that bend away from the microtubule axis. Both a 
kinetochore "plate" and an encircling, ring-shaped protein complex have been 
proposed to link protofilament bending to poleward chromosome motion. Here we 
show by electron tomography that slender fibrils connect curved protofilaments 
directly to the inner kinetochore. Fibril-protofilament associations correlate 
with a local straightening of the flared protofilaments. Theoretical analysis 
reveals that protofilament-fibril connections would be efficient couplers for 
chromosome motion, and experimental work on two very different kinetochore 
components suggests that filamentous proteins can couple shortening microtubules 
to cargo movements. These analyses define a ring-independent mechanism for 
harnessing microtubule dynamics directly to chromosome movement.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.038
PMCID: PMC2746696
PMID: 18957206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Curr Biol. 2011 Feb 8;21(3):R110-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.030.

Chromosome segregation: keeping kinetochores in the loop.

Schmidt JC(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2011 Feb 8;21(3):207-13. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.050.
    Curr Biol. 2011 Feb 8;21(3):214-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.048.

The Ndc80 complex is a key component of the kinetochore-microtubule interface. 
Two studies now demonstrate that a conserved loop region within the extended 
coiled-coil of Ndc80 plays an unexpected role in recruiting proteins to the 
kinetochore.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.12.030
PMID: 21300272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cell Biol. 2006 Apr 10;173(1):9-17. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200509158. Epub 2006 Apr 
3.

The human Mis12 complex is required for kinetochore assembly and proper 
chromosome segregation.

Kline SL(1), Cheeseman IM, Hori T, Fukagawa T, Desai A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.

During cell division, kinetochores form the primary chromosomal attachment sites 
for spindle microtubules. We previously identified a network of 10 interacting 
kinetochore proteins conserved between Caenorhabditis elegans and humans. In 
this study, we investigate three proteins in the human network (hDsn1Q9H410, 
hNnf1PMF1, and hNsl1DC31). Using coexpression in bacteria and fractionation of 
mitotic extracts, we demonstrate that these proteins form a stable complex with 
the conserved kinetochore component hMis12. Human or chicken cells depleted of 
Mis12 complex subunits are delayed in mitosis with misaligned chromosomes and 
defects in chromosome biorientation. Aligned chromosomes exhibited reduced 
centromere stretch and diminished kinetochore microtubule bundles. Consistent 
with this, localization of the outer plate constituent Ndc80HEC1 was severely 
reduced. The checkpoint protein BubR1, the fibrous corona component centromere 
protein (CENP) E, and the inner kinetochore proteins CENP-A and CENP-H also 
failed to accumulate to wild-type levels in depleted cells. These results 
indicate that a four-subunit Mis12 complex plays an essential role in chromosome 
segregation in vertebrates and contributes to mitotic kinetochore assembly.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200509158
PMCID: PMC2063780
PMID: 16585270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 9;8:15775. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15775.

Centromeres are maintained by fastening CENP-A to DNA and directing an arginine 
anchor-dependent nucleosome transition.

Guo LY(1)(2), Allu PK(1), Zandarashvili L(1), McKinley KL(3), Sekulic N(1), 
Dawicki-McKenna JM(1), Fachinetti D(4), Logsdon GA(1)(2), Jamiolkowski RM(5), 
Cleveland DW(4), Cheeseman IM(3), Black BE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
(4)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.
(5)Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Maintaining centromere identity relies upon the persistence of the epigenetic 
mark provided by the histone H3 variant, centromere protein A (CENP-A), but the 
molecular mechanisms that underlie its remarkable stability remain unclear. 
Here, we define the contributions of each of the three candidate CENP-A 
nucleosome-binding domains (two on CENP-C and one on CENP-N) to CENP-A stability 
using gene replacement and rapid protein degradation. Surprisingly, the most 
conserved domain, the CENP-C motif, is dispensable. Instead, the stability is 
conferred by the unfolded central domain of CENP-C and the folded N-terminal 
domain of CENP-N that becomes rigidified 1,000-fold upon crossbridging CENP-A 
and its adjacent nucleosomal DNA. Disrupting the 'arginine anchor' on CENP-C for 
the nucleosomal acidic patch disrupts the CENP-A nucleosome structural 
transition and removes CENP-A nucleosomes from centromeres. CENP-A nucleosome 
retention at centromeres requires a core centromeric nucleosome complex where 
CENP-C clamps down a stable nucleosome conformation and CENP-N fastens CENP-A to 
the DNA.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15775
PMCID: PMC5472775
PMID: 28598437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


89. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jan 8;152(1):197-212. doi: 10.1083/jcb.152.1.197.

Mitotic spindle integrity and kinetochore function linked by the Duo1p/Dam1p 
complex.

Cheeseman IM(1), Enquist-Newman M, Müller-Reichert T, Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Duo1p and Dam1p were previously identified as spindle proteins in the budding 
yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here, analyses of a diverse collection of duo1 
and dam1 alleles were used to develop a deeper understanding of the functions 
and interactions of Duo1p and Dam1p. Based on the similarity of mutant 
phenotypes, genetic interactions between duo1 and dam1 alleles, interdependent 
localization to the mitotic spindle, and Duo1p/Dam1p coimmunoprecipitation from 
yeast protein extracts, these analyses indicated that Duo1p and Dam1p perform a 
shared function in vivo as components of a protein complex. Duo1p and Dam1p are 
not required to assemble bipolar spindles, but they are required to maintain 
metaphase and anaphase spindle integrity. Immunofluorescence and electron 
microscopy of duo1 and dam1 mutant spindles revealed a diverse variety of 
spindle defects. Our results also indicate a second, previously unidentified, 
role for the Duo1p/Dam1p complex. duo1 and dam1 mutants show high rates of 
chromosome missegregation, premature anaphase events while arrested in 
metaphase, and genetic interactions with a subset of kinetochore components 
consistent with a role in kinetochore function. In addition, Duo1p and Dam1p 
localize to kinetochores in chromosome spreads, suggesting that this complex may 
serve as a link between the kinetochore and the mitotic spindle.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.152.1.197
PMCID: PMC2193660
PMID: 11149931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Trends Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;21(3):133-40. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2010.10.007. Epub 
2010 Nov 22.

Sensing centromere tension: Aurora B and the regulation of kinetochore function.

Lampson MA(1), Cheeseman IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Maintaining genome integrity during cell division requires regulated 
interactions between chromosomes and spindle microtubules. To ensure that 
daughter cells inherit the correct chromosomes, the sister kinetochores must 
attach to opposite spindle poles. Tension across the centromere stabilizes 
correct attachments, whereas phosphorylation of kinetochore substrates by the 
conserved Ipl1/Aurora B kinase selectively eliminates incorrect attachments. 
Here, we review our current understanding of how mechanical forces acting on the 
kinetochore are linked to biochemical changes to control chromosome segregation. 
We discuss models for tension sensing and regulation of kinetochore function 
downstream of Aurora B, and mechanisms that specify Aurora B localization to the 
inner centromere and determine its interactions with substrates at distinct 
locations.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2010.10.007
PMCID: PMC3049846
PMID: 21106376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cell. 2002 Oct 18;111(2):163-72. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00973-x.

Phospho-regulation of kinetochore-microtubule attachments by the Aurora kinase 
Ipl1p.

Cheeseman IM(1), Anderson S, Jwa M, Green EM, Kang Js, Yates JR 3rd, Chan CS, 
Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2003 May-Jun;2(3):228-9.

The Aurora kinase Ipl1p plays a crucial role in regulating 
kinetochore-microtubule attachments in budding yeast, but the underlying basis 
for this regulation is not known. To identify Ipl1p targets, we first purified 
28 kinetochore proteins from yeast protein extracts. These studies identified 
five previously uncharacterized kinetochore proteins and defined two additional 
kinetochore subcomplexes. We then used mass spectrometry to identify 18 
phosphorylation sites in 7 of these 28 proteins. Ten of these phosphorylation 
sites are targeted directly by Ipl1p, allowing us to identify a consensus 
phosphorylation site for an Aurora kinase. Our systematic mutational analysis of 
the Ipl1p phosphorylation sites demonstrated that the essential microtubule 
binding protein Dam1p is a key Ipl1p target for regulating 
kinetochore-microtubule attachments in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00973-x
PMID: 12408861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Cell Biol. 1998 Nov 16;143(4):1029-40. doi: 10.1083/jcb.143.4.1029.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae Duo1p and Dam1p, novel proteins involved in mitotic 
spindle function.

Hofmann C(1), Cheeseman IM, Goode BL, McDonald KL, Barnes G, Drubin DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3202, USA.

In this paper, we describe the identification and characterization of two novel 
and essential mitotic spindle proteins, Duo1p and Dam1p. Duo1p was isolated 
because its overexpression caused defects in mitosis and a mitotic arrest. Duo1p 
was localized by immunofluorescence, by immunoelectron microscopy, and by 
tagging with green fluorescent protein (GFP), to intranuclear spindle 
microtubules and spindle pole bodies. Temperature-sensitive duo1 mutants arrest 
with short spindles. This arrest is dependent on the mitotic checkpoint. Dam1p 
was identified by two-hybrid analysis as a protein that binds to Duo1p. By 
expressing a GFP-Dam1p fusion protein in yeast, Dam1p was also shown to be 
associated with intranuclear spindle microtubules and spindle pole bodies in 
vivo. As with Duo1p, overproduction of Dam1p caused mitotic defects. Biochemical 
experiments demonstrated that Dam1p binds directly to microtubules with 
micromolar affinity. We suggest that Dam1p might localize Duo1p to intranuclear 
microtubules and spindle pole bodies to provide a previously unrecognized 
function (or functions) required for mitosis.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.143.4.1029
PMCID: PMC2132964
PMID: 9817759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(8):e1001378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001378. Epub 2012 Aug 
21.

LAB-1 targets PP1 and restricts Aurora B kinase upon entrance into meiosis to 
promote sister chromatid cohesion.

Tzur YB(1), Egydio de Carvalho C, Nadarajan S, Van Bostelen I, Gu Y, Chu DS, 
Cheeseman IM, Colaiácovo MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Successful execution of the meiotic program depends on the timely establishment 
and removal of sister chromatid cohesion. LAB-1 has been proposed to act in the 
latter by preventing the premature removal of the meiosis-specific cohesin REC-8 
at metaphase I in C. elegans, yet the mechanism and scope of LAB-1 function 
remained unknown. Here we identify an unexpected earlier role for LAB-1 in 
promoting the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion in prophase I. LAB-1 
and REC-8 are both required for the chromosomal association of the cohesin 
complex subunit SMC-3. Depletion of lab-1 results in partial loss of sister 
chromatid cohesion in rec-8 and coh-4 coh-3 mutants and further enhanced 
chromatid dissociation in worms where all three kleisins are mutated. Moreover, 
lab-1 depletion results in increased Aurora B kinase (AIR-2) signals in early 
prophase I nuclei, coupled with a parallel decrease in signals for the PP1 
homolog, GSP-2. Finally, LAB-1 directly interacts with GSP-1 and GSP-2. We 
propose that LAB-1 targets the PP1 homologs to the chromatin at the onset of 
meiosis I, thereby antagonizing AIR-2 and cooperating with the cohesin complex 
to promote sister chromatid association and normal progression of the meiotic 
program.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001378
PMCID: PMC3424243
PMID: 22927794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


94. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2012 Dec;69(12):1069-85. doi: 10.1002/cm.21077. Epub 
2012 Oct 11.

Targeted proteomic dissection of Toxoplasma cytoskeleton sub-compartments using 
MORN1.

Lorestani A(1), Ivey FD, Thirugnanam S, Busby MA, Marth GT, Cheeseman IM, 
Gubbels MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.

The basal complex in Toxoplasma functions as the contractile ring in the cell 
division process. Basal complex contraction tapers the daughter cytoskeleton 
toward the basal end and is required for daughter segregation. We have 
previously shown that the protein MORN1 is essential for basal complex assembly 
and likely acts as a scaffolding protein. To further our understanding of the 
basal complex, we combined subcellular fractionation with an affinity 
purification of the MORN1 complex and identified its protein composition. We 
identified two new components of the basal complex, one of which uniquely 
associated with the basal complex in mature parasites, the first of its kind. In 
addition, we identified several other novel cytoskeleton proteins with different 
spatiotemporal dynamics throughout cell division. Since many of these proteins 
are unique to Apicomplexa this study significantly contributes to the annotation 
of their unique cytoskeleton. Furthermore, we show that G-actin binding protein 
TgCAP is localized at the apical cap region in intracellular parasites, but 
quickly redistributes to a cytoplasmic localization pattern upon egress. © 2012 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cm.21077
PMCID: PMC3566231
PMID: 23027733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


95. Biomol NMR Assign. 2014 Oct;8(2):275-8. doi: 10.1007/s12104-013-9499-x. Epub 
2013 Jun 14.

Resonance assignments of the microtubule-binding domain of the C. elegans 
spindle and kinetochore-associated protein 1.

Boeszoermenyi A(1), Schmidt JC, Cheeseman IM, Oberer M, Wagner G, Arthanari H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

During mitosis, kinetochores coordinate the attachment of centromeric DNA to the 
dynamic plus ends of microtubules, which is hypothesized to pull sister 
chromatids toward opposing poles of the mitotic spindle. The outer kinetochore 
Ndc80 complex acts synergistically with the Ska (spindle and 
kinetochore-associated) complex to harness the energy of depolymerizing 
microtubules and power chromosome movement. The Ska complex is a hexamer 
consisting of two copies of the proteins Ska1, Ska2 and Ska3, respectively. The 
C-terminal domain of the spindle and kinetochore-associated protein 1 (Ska1) is 
the microtubule-binding domain of the Ska complex. We solved the solution 
structure of the C. elegans microtubule-binding domain (MTBD) of the protein 
Ska1 using NMR spectroscopy. Here, we report the resonance assignments of the 
MTBD of C. elegans Ska1.

DOI: 10.1007/s12104-013-9499-x
PMCID: PMC3823668
PMID: 23765286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell. 2012 Feb 3;148(3):487-501. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.061.

CENP-T-W-S-X forms a unique centromeric chromatin structure with a histone-like 
fold.

Nishino T(1), Takeuchi K, Gascoigne KE, Suzuki A, Hori T, Oyama T, Morikawa K, 
Cheeseman IM, Fukagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics and The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Cell. 2012 Feb 3;148(3):394-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.01.023.

The multiprotein kinetochore complex must assemble at a specific site on each 
chromosome to achieve accurate chromosome segregation. Defining the nature of 
the DNA-protein interactions that specify the position of the kinetochore and 
provide a scaffold for kinetochore formation remain key goals. Here, we 
demonstrate that the centromeric histone-fold-containing CENP-T-W and CENP-S-X 
complexes coassemble to form a stable CENP-T-W-S-X heterotetramer. 
High-resolution structural analysis of the individual complexes and the 
heterotetramer reveals similarity to other histone fold-containing complexes 
including canonical histones within a nucleosome. The CENP-T-W-S-X 
heterotetramer binds to and supercoils DNA. Mutants designed to compromise 
heterotetramerization or the DNA-protein contacts around the heterotetramer 
strongly reduce the DNA binding and supercoiling activities in vitro and 
compromise kinetochore assembly in vivo. These data suggest that the 
CENP-T-W-S-X complex forms a unique nucleosome-like structure to generate 
contacts with DNA, extending the "histone code" beyond canonical nucleosome 
proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.061
PMCID: PMC3277711
PMID: 22304917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell. 2008 Dec 12;135(6):1039-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.019.

CCAN makes multiple contacts with centromeric DNA to provide distinct pathways 
to the outer kinetochore.

Hori T(1), Amano M, Suzuki A, Backer CB, Welburn JP, Dong Y, McEwen BF, Shang 
WH, Suzuki E, Okawa K, Cheeseman IM, Fukagawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics and The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, 
Japan.

Kinetochore specification and assembly requires the targeted deposition of 
specialized nucleosomes containing the histone H3 variant CENP-A at centromeres. 
However, CENP-A is not sufficient to drive full-kinetochore assembly, and it is 
not clear how centromeric chromatin is established. Here, we identify CENP-W as 
a component of the DNA-proximal constitutive centromere-associated network 
(CCAN) of proteins. We demonstrate that CENP-W forms a DNA-binding complex 
together with the CCAN component CENP-T. This complex directly associates with 
nucleosomal DNA and with canonical histone H3, but not with CENP-A, in 
centromeric regions. CENP-T/CENP-W functions upstream of other CCAN components 
with the exception of CENP-C, an additional putative DNA-binding protein. Our 
analysis indicates that CENP-T/CENP-W and CENP-C provide distinct pathways to 
connect the centromere with outer kinetochore assembly. In total, our results 
suggest that the CENP-T/CENP-W complex is directly involved in establishment of 
centromere chromatin structure coordinately with CENP-A.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.10.019
PMID: 19070575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Sep;12(9):2601-13. doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.9.2601.

Dad1p, third component of the Duo1p/Dam1p complex involved in kinetochore 
function and mitotic spindle integrity.

Enquist-Newman M(1), Cheeseman IM, Van Goor D, Drubin DG, Meluh PB, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3202, USA.

We showed recently that a complex between Duo1p and Dam1p is required for both 
spindle integrity and kinetochore function in the budding yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. To extend our understanding of the functions and interactions of the 
Duo1p/Dam1p complex, we analyzed the novel gene product Dad1p (for Duo1 and Dam1 
interacting). Dad1p physically associates with Duo1p by two-hybrid analysis, 
coimmunoprecipitates with Duo1p and Dam1p out of yeast protein extracts, and 
shows interdependent localization with Duo1p and Dam1p to the mitotic spindle. 
These results indicate that Dad1p functions as a component of the Duo1p/Dam1p 
complex. Like Duo1p and Dam1p, Dad1p also localizes to kinetochore regions in 
chromosomes spreads. Here, we also demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation 
that Duo1p, Dam1p, and Dad1p associate specifically with centromeric DNA in a 
manner that is dependent upon Ndc10 and partially dependent upon the presence of 
microtubules. To explore the functions of Dad1p in vivo, we generated a 
temperature-sensitive allele, dad1-1. This allele shows spindle defects and a 
mitotic arrest phenotype that is dependent upon the spindle assembly checkpoint. 
In addition, dad1-1 mutants undergo chromosome mis-segregation at the 
restrictive temperature, resulting in a dramatic decrease in viability.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.12.9.2601
PMCID: PMC59698
PMID: 11553702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Cell Biol. 2001 Nov 26;155(5):763-74. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200105029. Epub 2001 
Nov 26.

Functional cooperation of Dam1, Ipl1, and the inner centromere protein 
(INCENP)-related protein Sli15 during chromosome segregation.

Kang J(1), Cheeseman IM, Kallstrom G, Velmurugan S, Barnes G, Chan CS.

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

We have shown previously that Ipl1 and Sli15 are required for chromosome 
segregation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Sli15 associates directly with the Ipl1 
protein kinase and these two proteins colocalize to the mitotic spindle. We show 
here that Sli15 stimulates the in vitro, and likely in vivo, kinase activity of 
Ipl1, and Sli15 facilitates the association of Ipl1 with the mitotic spindle. 
The Ipl1-binding and -stimulating activities of Sli15 both reside within a 
region containing homology to the metazoan inner centromere protein (INCENP). 
Ipl1 and Sli15 also bind to Dam1, a microtubule-binding protein required for 
mitotic spindle integrity and kinetochore function. Sli15 and Dam1 are most 
likely physiological targets of Ipl1 since Ipl1 can phosphorylate both proteins 
efficiently in vitro, and the in vivo phosphorylation of both proteins is 
reduced in ipl1 mutants. Some dam1 mutations exacerbate the phenotype of ipl1 
and sli15 mutants, thus providing evidence that Dam1 interactions with 
Ipl1-Sli15 are functionally important in vivo. Similar to Dam1, Ipl1 and Sli15 
each bind to microtubules directly in vitro, and they are associated with yeast 
centromeric DNA in vivo. Given their dual association with microtubules and 
kinetochores, Ipl1, Sli15, and Dam1 may play crucial roles in regulating 
chromosome-spindle interactions or in the movement of kinetochores along 
microtubules.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200105029
PMCID: PMC2150868
PMID: 11724818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genes Dev. 2004 Sep 15;18(18):2255-68. doi: 10.1101/gad.1234104.

A conserved protein network controls assembly of the outer kinetochore and its 
ability to sustain tension.

Cheeseman IM(1), Niessen S, Anderson S, Hyndman F, Yates JR 3rd, Oegema K, Desai 
A.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. 
icheeseman@ucsd.edu

Kinetochores play an essential role in chromosome segregation by forming dynamic 
connections with spindle microtubules. Here, we identify a set of 10 copurifying 
kinetochore proteins from Caenorhabditis elegans, seven of which were previously 
uncharacterized. Using in vivo assays to monitor chromosome segregation, 
kinetochore assembly, and the mechanical stability of chromosome-microtubule 
attachments, we show that this copurifying protein network plays a central role 
at the kinetochore-microtubule interface. In addition, our analysis suggests 
that the network is comprised of three groups of proteins that contribute in 
distinct ways to this interface: KNL proteins act after the assembly of 
centromeric chromatin to generate the core of the microtubule-binding interface, 
MIS proteins control the rate and extent of formation of this interface, and NDC 
proteins are necessary to sustain tension during interactions with spindle 
microtubules. We also purify a similar set of associated proteins from human 
cells that includes four novel proteins and has recognizable homologs from each 
functional class. Thus, this protein network is a conserved constituent of the 
outer kinetochore, and the functions defined by our analysis in C. elegans are 
likely to be widely relevant.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1234104
PMCID: PMC517519
PMID: 15371340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cell Biol. 2003 Oct 27;163(2):215-22. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200305100.

Architecture of the budding yeast kinetochore reveals a conserved molecular 
core.

Westermann S(1), Cheeseman IM, Anderson S, Yates JR 3rd, Drubin DG, Barnes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Barker Hall, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. gbarnes@socrates.berkeley.edu

How kinetochore proteins are organized to connect chromosomes to spindle 
microtubules, and whether any structural and organizational themes are common to 
kinetochores from distantly related organisms, are key unanswered questions. 
Here, we used affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry to generate a map of 
kinetochore protein interactions. The budding yeast CENP-C homologue Mif2p 
specifically copurified with histones H2A, H2B, and H4, and with the histone 
H3-like CENP-A homologue Cse4p, strongly suggesting that Cse4p replaces histone 
H3 in a specialized centromeric nucleosome. A novel four-protein Mtw1 complex, 
the Nnf1p subunit of which has homology to the vertebrate kinetochore protein 
CENP-H, also copurified with Mif2p and a variety of central kinetochore 
proteins. We show that Mif2 is a critical in vivo target of the Aurora kinase 
Ipl1p. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated the biological 
relevance of these associations. We propose that a molecular core consisting of 
CENP-A, -C, -H, and Ndc80/HEC has been conserved from yeast to humans to link 
centromeres to spindle microtubules.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200305100
PMCID: PMC2173538
PMID: 14581449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Nov;23(21):4145-7. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-05-0382.

Building a path in cell biology.

Voeltz G(1), Cheeseman I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular & Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. gia.voeltz@colorado.edu

Setting up a new lab is an exciting but challenging prospect. We discuss our 
experiences in finding a path to tackle some of the key current questions in 
cell biology and the hurdles that we have encountered along the way.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E12-05-0382
PMCID: PMC3484087
PMID: 23112222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Cell Biol. 2008 Sep 22;182(6):1055-61. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200804170. Epub 2008 
Sep 15.

Orientation and structure of the Ndc80 complex on the microtubule lattice.

Wilson-Kubalek EM(1), Cheeseman IM, Yoshioka C, Desai A, Milligan RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

The four-subunit Ndc80 complex, comprised of Ndc80/Nuf2 and Spc24/Spc25 dimers, 
directly connects kinetochores to spindle microtubules. The complex is anchored 
to the kinetochore at the Spc24/25 end, and the Ndc80/Nuf2 dimer projects 
outward to bind to microtubules. Here, we use cryoelectron microscopy and 
helical image analysis to visualize the interaction of the Ndc80/Nuf2 dimer with 
microtubules. Our results, when combined with crystallography data, suggest that 
the globular domain of the Ndc80 subunit binds strongly at the interface between 
tubulin dimers and weakly at the adjacent intradimer interface along the 
protofilament axis. Such a binding mode, in which the Ndc80 complex interacts 
with sequential alpha/beta-tubulin heterodimers, may be important for 
stabilizing kinetochore-bound microtubules. Additionally, we define the binding 
of the Ndc80 complex relative to microtubule polarity, which reveals that the 
microtubule interaction surface is at a considerable distance from the opposite 
kinetochore-anchored end; this binding geometry may facilitate polymerization 
and depolymerization at kinetochore-attached microtubule ends.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200804170
PMCID: PMC2542468
PMID: 18794333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Mar 13:2024.03.12.584469. doi: 
10.1101/2024.03.12.584469.

Functional genetics reveals modulators of anti-microtubule drug sensitivity.

Su KC(1)(2), Radul E(1)(2)(3), Maier NK(1)(4)(2)(5), Tsang MJ(1)(2)(6), Goul 
C(1)(4)(7), Moodie B(1), Keys HR(1), Cheeseman IM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 455 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142.
(2)These authors contributed equally.
(3)Present address: Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Biophysics, Department of 
Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02142.
(5)Present address: Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA.
(6)Present address: Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Present address: Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, UC Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

Microtubules play essential roles in diverse cellular processes and are 
important pharmacological targets for treating human disease. Here, we sought to 
identify cellular factors that modulate the sensitivity of cells to 
anti-microtubule drugs. We conducted a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9-based functional 
genetics screen in human cells treated with the microtubule-destabilizing drug 
nocodazole or the microtubule-stabilizing drug taxol. We further conducted a 
focused secondary screen to test drug sensitivity for ~1400 gene targets across 
two distinct human cell lines and to additionally test sensitivity to the 
Kif11-inhibitor, STLC. These screens defined gene targets whose loss enhances or 
suppresses sensitivity to anti-microtubule drugs. In addition to gene targets 
whose loss sensitized cells to multiple compounds, we observed cases of 
differential sensitivity to specific compounds and differing requirements 
between cell lines. Our downstream molecular analysis further revealed 
additional roles for established microtubule-associated proteins and identified 
new players in microtubule function.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.03.12.584469
PMCID: PMC10979949
PMID: 38559203


105. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 14:2024.02.25.581584. doi: 
10.1101/2024.02.25.581584.

Binding Site Maturation Modulated by Molecular Density Underlies Ndc80 Binding 
to Kinetochore Receptor CENP-T.

Tarasovetc EV(1), Sissoko GB(2)(3), Maiorov A(1), Mukhina AS(1), Ataullakhanov 
FI(1), Cheeseman IM(2)(3), Grishchuk EL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research; Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.

Macromolecular assembly depends on tightly regulated pairwise binding 
interactions that are selectively favored at assembly sites while being 
disfavored in the soluble phase. This selective control can arise due to 
molecular density-enhanced binding, as recently found for the kinetochore 
scaffold protein CENP-T. When clustered, CENP-T recruits markedly more Ndc80 
complexes than its monomeric counterpart, but the underlying molecular basis 
remains elusive. Here, we use quantitative in vitro assays to reveal two 
distinct mechanisms driving this behavior. First, Ndc80 binding to CENP-T is a 
two-step process: initially, Ndc80 molecules rapidly associate and dissociate 
from disordered N-terminal binding sites on CENP-T. Over time, these sites 
undergo maturation, resulting in stronger Ndc80 retention. Second, we find that 
this maturation transition is regulated by a kinetic barrier that is sensitive 
to the molecular environment. In the soluble phase, binding site maturation is 
slow, but within CENP-T clusters, this process is markedly accelerated. Notably, 
the two Ndc80 binding sites in human CENP-T exhibit distinct maturation rates 
and environmental sensitivities, which correlate with their different amino-acid 
content and predicted binding conformations. This clustering-induced maturation 
is evident in dividing human cells, suggesting a distinct regulatory entry point 
for controlling kinetochore assembly. We propose that the tunable acceleration 
of binding site maturation by molecular crowding may represent a general 
mechanism for promoting the formation of macromolecular structures.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.02.25.581584
PMCID: PMC10925139
PMID: 38464265

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interest Statement: Authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.